1.	Introduction
For many enterprises internationalization can be an attractive way to seek new markets, expand operations, and eventually maintain greater incomes. Mergers and acquisitions are a fast way for companies to grow and expand their functions abroad. However, companies going abroad face many challenges that are not as dominant, if even existent, on the domestic market. Many of the challenges have to do with differences in culture, both national and organizational culture. As internationals mergers and acquisitions take place more and more often it is important to study the factors behind their success and failure. Since Human resource is the department of the company that takes care of the employees, they possess a key position in assuring the success of the merger or the acquisition, and it is the perspective that will be used in this study.
The purpose of this study is to recognize and analyze the largest and most common challenges that HR faces in the process of international mergers and acquisitions. According to a McKinsey study conducted in 2000 the factors having a key role in the success of mergers and acquisitions are “1. Retention of key talent, 2. Effective communication, 3. Executive retention, 4. Cultural integration”. An overview of academic literature written about the subject will be presented. It will be discussed if academic studies support the argument made by McKinsey. 
The theoretical framework is divided into three parts; the first two are based on academic literature. In the first part the process of mergers and acquisitions will be presented. In the second part, the main challenges of the process will be analyzed from a Human resource- perspective. In the last part, the literature presented will be analyzed, and compared to the findings of McKinsey, as mentioned earlier.
1.1.	Research question
The research question in this study will be 
1.	What are the main challenges of Human resource management in international mergers and acquisitions?
1.2.	Definitions
Merger
A merger is formed when two separate entities come together to build a new company with combined assets. (Schuler & Jackson, 2001)
Acquisition
In an acquisition one company purchases the majority of another company’s stocks, the purchased company becomes a part of the other company. (Schuler & Jackson, 2001)
International Merger and acquisition
Mergers and acquisitions are defined international when the companies involved have head quarters in different countries.  
2.	Theoretical framework
There have been several theories presented on the roles of Human Resource department. Perhaps the most widely known and accepted in academic research is the one presented by Ulrich in 1997. According to the study conducting four different roles can be identified: 1.Strategic partner, 2. Administrative Expert, 3. Employee champion, and 4. Change agent. According to Antila (Antila, 2006) all of these four can be found in the processes of international mergers and acquisitions. However it is important to acknowledge that the role of an HR expert is not similar in all organizations, it can vary depending on the person, the job description or the situations.
Antila (Antila, 2006) argues that the challenges faced by Human resource management start already before the actual merger or acquisition. As Ulrich has also presented, Human resource management should be involved already in the strategy creating process. According to Antila (Antila, 2006) this nowadays also is often the situation in practice. The findings of the study also indicate that if the HR management is not involved in the strategic work the implementation of the strategy is very negatively affected as it becomes more difficult for the people involved to implement a strategy created by others. This point of view is supported by Schuler and Jackson’s study also (Schuler & Jackson, 2001). They acclaim that in order for the merger or the acquisition to be successful HR management shall be developing the strategy and the process. 
When it comes to the implementation of the strategy, Antila (Antila, 2006) writes that the HR management is responsible for controlling and planning the strategy implementation, but also for the integration process. Another important aspect is that according to the study HR management play a key role in taking care of administrative work during the merger or acquisition process. It is even considered given, that HR management has responsibility over the legal aspects of the implementation and all the agreements, as well as pay roll policies and activities. As a part of being responsible for the pay roll activities, HR management is often a lot in contact with local labor unions. Antila writes that this can be a challenge that often is ignored in studies of international mergers and acquisitions. 
Focus was also given, however little, to managing cultural challenges. Same phenomena can be seen in the study of Schuler and Jackson (Schuler & Jackson, 2001) as they mention the importance of integrating and managing the eventual cultural issues that may occur. However, neither of the studies gives any solutions on how to manage these challenges.
In the process of implementing the merger or the acquisition, Antila highlights that communication is one of the focus points of HR management’s work. This is supported by the study made by Schuler and Jackson (Schuler & Jackson, 2001). Antila discusses more the role of HR management as the one taking care of the communication towards all directions; between executives and line managers, between the old and the new company and information to all the employees of the company. Schuler and Jackson focus more on the responsibility of providing an efficient way of communication within the company and overseeing that everybody is kept informed.
Mergers and acquisitions are great changes in all companies, and therefore there is often somebody in charge of the change process. Antila writes that according to the study conducted, HR management often work in the background, consulting the line managers on how the implement the actions of change in the organization. However Schuler and Jackson argue for a more active role for the HR management in leading change. Their point of view is though the alignment of right people to the different tasks in order to guarantee successful operations. They don’t mention about supervising concretely the operations, or even consulting the line managers about 
3.	Discussion
When we compare the theoretical framework to the theory presented by McKinsey consultants, we can see that the McKinsey concentrates more on the practical implementation of the strategy. In the theory, focus was laid also on HR’s responsibilities and roles in formulating the strategy.   
Similarities between theories presented and the McKinsey framework are several. A propos the implementation, Antila argues that one of the most important aspects is integration. In Antila’s work, the importance of communication as a part of HR management’s responsibilities is also highlighted.   
The focus on McKinsey’s model was largely the retention of talent and knowledge. These aspects are very moderately, if at all, discussed in the academic studies. This surprises me greatly, given that it is the knowledge that creates value in companies. Therefore the retention of talent and knowledge should be a natural part of the work of HR management, not only in international mergers and acquisitions, but in everything that is done. It is common in mergers and acquisitions that a lot of the personnel change, as the situation change. Therefore it is even more crucial for the company to guarantee that the knowledge doesn’t leave the company even if the employees do. 

