Change management in post-transaction integration processes

1. Introduction
Macroeconomic developments of the past decades have presented new challenges for companies at an increasing rate. Companies are expected to perform better on fewer resources. Not only are companies expected to streamline their organizations and production processes,  they also face pressure to develop new products while increasing production and entering new markets. Growth is considered a prerequisite for competitive advantage. Mergers and acquisitions are sometimes considered viable solutions. Theoretically, they can offer a rapid introduction to new markets, stronger position on current markets and elimination of overlapping functions. However, studies suggest that mergers and acquisitions seldom achieve their projected results (Bennebroek Gravenhorst et al., 1999; Porter, 1987; Young, 1981), and are moreoften detrimental than profitable (Ravenscraft and Scherer, 1989). 
The past few decades has seen a steady rise of research on mergers and acquisitions, although much of it is limited to pre-transaction phases. This paper will argue that mergers and acquisitions will most likely fail despite careful preparation, unless the post-transaction integration process is properly managed.  This can be attributed to claims that academics have traditionally neglected to study how organizations react when merged (Datta, 1991).  Today it is widely recognized that a successful merger is the result of much more than a well chosen counterpart. Mark Feldman (1999, 2000), who has conducted several studies on the post-transaction integration process, concludes that failures can often be attributed to problems in communication and structuring. Disruptions in these factors will cause delays, prime catalysts for failure. A study conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers revealed that companies running their integration projects as fast as possible reached 80 percent of their goals on schedule (Feldman and Spratt, 1999:22). 
The aim of this paper is to study integration processes as change management challenges.  In accordance with Birkinshaw et al. (2000), this paper will treat an integration project as an amalgamation of two different types of integration: task integration and human integration. Task integration consists of processes that integrates the functions of one organization into another and vice versa, while human integration consists of communication- and HRM processes. The main objective of this paper is to study whether there are change management models in structuring and process planning that could be used in task integration, and which (if any) change management models in communication and HRM could be useful in human integration. The findings suggest that several integration projects may have been conducted without notable usage of change management models. This is supported by studying the reasons as to why integration projects tend to fail, and comparing them to the models in this paper. A central part of this argument will be Feldman’s (2000) article “Avoiding the Seven Deadly Sins of Postmerger Integration”. 
This paper is organized into 4 parts, the literature view starting with an introductory description of change as a conflict situation. This will introduce the task integration part of the paper, presenting a process-based view of change management and how it could contribute to a successful integration of processes. The human integration part of the paper will discuss Elving’s (2005) model of communication during a  change project.  The paper will then discuss the effect these models may have in an integration project, and conclude by offering guidelines for future mergers and acquisistions.
2. Roots of Conflict: Wilfried Krüger’s Iceberg
As stated earlier, organizations facing change often generate conflict. In the case of mergers, conflict does not appear exclusively in the target organization, as changes caused by the deal also affect the acquirers. Wilfried Krüger’s Iceberg is a theoretical model describing the origins of conflict within an organization, divided into tangible (visible) and intangible (invisible) groups. This division is an important aspect of change management as it reflects the seemingly chaotic nature of integration projects: As suggested in many studies (this included), mergers and acquisitions tend to fail because managers focus mainly on the clearly visible and easily monitored aspects of the project. The model depiction of this features an iceberg, with the visible aspects above the “surface” and the rest below: 
Management tends to overlook factors that hide under the surface, focusing only on the “visible” parts of the project. These parts are quality, cost and time, and they all share qualities that make them easy to convey to investors. However, the model represents these three parts as directly affected by the underlying factors, suggesting that any claims as to the state of the organization is unreliable without extensive knowledge of these “hidden” aspects. In addition to being difficult to describe in reports, Management of Perceptions and Beliefs and Power and Politics Management are also challenging to manage in a change project. Krüger suggests that conflict is significantly affected by the type of change the organization is facing, and the hidden factors play an intricate part in shaping the type of opposition. The rate at which an organization will oppose change correlates with how extensively the project calls for adjustment in the underlying factors. 
The model also identifies four types of actors that may appear in an organization undergoing change, ranging from individuals that promote change to those that oppose it. The model’s objective in this sense is to give insight as how to minimize the negative effects provided by these actors and how to promote the positive ones. Opponents view the project in a negative light in addition to acting against it, while hidden opponents will go along while masking their animosity. The latter is considered more dangerous than the former, especially if the person in question is in a position of power. Potential promoters do not actively voice their approval of the project, although they do approve of it, while promoters are seen as a driving force in a change process.
3. Task Integration: Change management in phases
The notion of describing organizational change as a series of phases is a relatively old one, although its merits have not been addressed in practice, as evidenced in studies conducted on failed mergers and acquisitions. The number of phases described in theoretical models have increased from three (Lewin, 1947) to five (Pettigrew & Whipp, 1991) and then eight (Kotter, 1995). The argument behind these theories is that organizational change is too complex to effectively describe in one phase, although one could also argue that it is too complex for merely eight phases. Then again, it is widely accepted that a multiprocess approach is beneficial as it demonstrates that change does not happen overnight. This section will concentrate on Kotter’s model of change in eight phases after having a short look on the three-phase model by Lewin and the five-phase model by Pettigrew and Whipp.
One of the first models describing organizational change as a series of phases was developed by Kurt Lewin (1947, 1951, 1999). It features a three-phase approach, which each phase facing driving and opposing forces. The first phase is called “unfreezing”, referring to a process in which existing norms are brought into question, allowing (in theory) a more flexible environment to emerge. The second phase involves the actual change process, in which the agenda is realized and the proposed changes executed. The third phase calls for “re-freezing”, which translates to a process in which the new changes are solidified as a part of the organizational culture. Lewin points out that each phase should be accompanied by an extensive communication strategy to prevent any uncertainly and misinformation to cause corrosion to the project and the organization. However, this part pertains to the human integration part of the study and will therefore be olaborated upon in a later section.
In addition to it’s five phases, Pettigrew & Whipp’s (1991) model features three dimensions which play an intricate part in each phase. First, we have content, which encompasses the objective, purpose and goal of the phase. Second, process, which describes how the phase is executed. Third, context which clarifies which aspects of the organization is undergoing change. In other words, the dimensions could be construed as WHAT, HOW and WHERE. The difference in regards to Lewin’s and Kotter’s theories is that this model does not necessitate a certain sequence in it’s phases, but should rather be seen as a series of aspects important to every change project. The five aspects are.
1. Environmental assessment - continuous monitoring of both the internal and external environment [competition] of the organization through open learning systems
2. Human resources as assets and liabilities - employees should        know they are seen as valuable and feel trusted by the organization
3. Linking strategic and operational change - Intentions are implemented and transformed through time, bundling of operational activities is powerful and can lead to new strategic changes
4. Leading change - Move the organization forwards; creating the right climate for change, coordinating activities, steering. Setting the agenda not only for the direction of the change, but also for the right vision and values)
5. Overall coherence - a change strategy should be consistent (clear goals), consonant (with its environment), provide a competitive edge and be feasible
(Pettigrew & Whipp, 1991, copied from www.valuebasedmanagement.net)
3.1 Kotters model
This model offers a general view on how structures and processes can be integrated by following a clear and standardized strategy. It is worth noting that every integration is unique, and utilizing a strategy from a previous project in a new one is not a guarantee of success (Ashkenas et al. 1998). In response, this model does not go into specifics and keeps every guideline vague to facilitate improvisation. Also, many of these phases are active simultaneously, 
Phase 1:  Create urgency
Phase one is active simultaneously with other phases, as it stresses the need of keeping and organization susceptible to change throghout the whole process. According to Kotter, it is important to start every change project by developing a base upon which the rest of the phases can stand on. The comparison with the first phase in Lewin’s model is apparent, although Kotter stresses the necessity of maintaining it. The need for a new base rests on the notion that complacency is one of the prime reasons for delays in organizational change, which loosely translates to people being unsure as to why change is necessary. In a worst case scenario, the project grinds to a halt because the urgency for change was not effectively communicated. Complancency can manifest in an organization facing success, no visible threats, low standards and lack of external feedback, just to name a few, and it can prove detrimental to a change project if the organization does not see any need for change. Creating a base for change involves instigating a sense of urgency, fostering a cultural shift towards a change-oriented organization. Maintaining the base is equally important. As the project moves forward, the organization faces a constant threat of a relapse to complacency which is why phase one encompasses the entire duration. In fact, maintaining some phase one operations even after the project is finished is not unheard of as Kotter suggests that complete cultural integration can remain elusive decades after financially acceptable integration has been achieved (Kotter, 1995)
Phase 2: Form a powerful coalition
Kotter suggests that a small group led by a change leader is the most effective in representing the new organization and leading the change process. This group should be empowered in order to perform effectively and have means of communicating with the entire organization. This part is critical and often neglected, leaving the coalition inefficient in its duty. Ashkenas et al. (1998) shares this view, pointing out that leading a change project is a full-time job. Kotter goes on to point out the importance of including managers from day-to day operations in the coalition, a view supported by Pettigrew and Whipp (1991) in the third factor of their model (the link between strategic and operative change)
Phases 3 and 4: Create and communicate a vision of change
The benefits of urgency and coalitions cannot be realized without a effectively communicated common vision. Along with phases 1, 2 and 5, it is important to start working on a vision and the means of communicating it early on. A well designed vision is ineffective when not communicated properly to the organization. Kotter (1995) and Elving (2005) both stress the importance of communication as a tool for relaying information and creating common ground. Kotter mentions three instances when a coalition is ineffective in communicating the project’s vision. In the first example the group uses more time formulating the vision than communicating it. In most cases the vision is communicated only through a few meetings and a memo, a method deemed inefficient as it should only encompass a fraction of the communication during integration. In the second example the responsibility for communication is borne only by the project leader, while it should involve all managers. In his third example, Kotter describes a well communicated vision which unfortunately is not acted upon by managers. Feldman (1995) and Kotter both suggest that the best results in communicating a new vision can be achieved when managers demonstrate that they are not above it.
Phase 5: Remove obstacles
This phase is mainly a continuation to phase 2 and it involves empowering the coalition, allowing them to remove any obstacles that may prevent the project from being realized.
Phase 6: Create short-term wins
Kotter credits short-term wins as they are effective in demonstrating that the project is moving forward and preventing stagnation. Without short-term wins, hidden opponents may become opponents as per Krüger’s model. Kotter mentions 6 factors that describe the merits of short-term wins:
1. They demonstrate that the project is worth the short-term sacrifices it requires
2. They function as positive feedback for the core group
3. Short-term wins are a good indicator for areas that need improvement
4. and 5. They are effective data for reports to investors and executives, who may or may not         be sceptical in regards to the project
6. The sixth factor is best described in terms of the Iceberg model, as it mentions the effect of         short-term wins on members of the organization. Progress has the effect of transforming         potential promoters to promoters and opponents to potential promoters.
Phase 7: Build on change
Kotter warns against declaring triumph too early, which is a common mistake, mainly because it quickly generates complacency. Management may find themselves tempted to declare the project successful because of short-term wins. This in turn highlights the importance of a well formulated and communicated vision that allows the project to proceed at the required fast pace.
Phase 8: Anchor the Changes in Corporate Culture
Organizational culture is slow to change, which may cause this phase to continue long after the project has officially finished. However, if the new changes are not anchored in culture, the organization risks eventually returning to an earlier state. Kotter suggests that the changes are best rooted in the organizational culture by recruiting new people in key positions and indoctrinating them into the new culture through mentoring programs.
4. Human Integration: Elving’s Model
Elving describes communication as having two roles in organizational change; communication has to inform and create unity during an change process. In addition, the model takes into account the organizations readiness to change. The model is described on the basis of six statements considered important in planning a communication strategy, which in turn helps the change project itself. These statements also function as suggestion for further research in organizational communication.
1. An effective change process has little or no opposition, and/or a workforce willing to change
2. One of the prime objectives of communication is to inform the members of the organization about the project and how it affects them. This will have a direct effect on the organizations readiness to change.
3. Communication fosters unity, which in turn creates a commitment towards the organization and its management
4. Uncertainty has a negative effect on an organizations ability to change 
5. Uncertainty has a significant effect on the organizations ability to change when the process involves streamlining and the loss of jobs
6. Communication has an effect on uncertainty regarding the organization itself and the future of jobs.
Communication in change projects is mainly connected to the role of mitigating uncertainty. If not addressed properly, uncertainly will spawn rumors and false truths which may have a detrimental effect on the project. Kotter (1995) and Feldman & Spratt (1999) all point out that communication should work both ways, and not merely function as an information outlet. DeGreene (1982) mentions several downsides to a one-way communication strategy, ranging from the effects of erroneous information to gaps in the information chain.
5. Discussion: Integration and conflicts
After comparing the theories in the task integration part of the literature review with the most common mistakes in change projects according to Feldman ( list found at http://articles.sfgate.com/1998-10-25/business/28605579_1 ), I will suggest that several integrations are attempted without knowledge of process-based change management models.  Managers seem to overwhelm themselves with information, create rigid organizations that are not suitable for rapid change, get marred in cultural difficulties and neglect developing a functioning communication strategy. All of these factors may cause delays the the project, which Kotter (1995) and Feldman (2000) describe as a prime reason for complication. I will not swear to the infallibility of the models, but the sheer volume of failed mergers contra the popularity of the theories I have chosen suggest a correlation.
The main objective of this paper was to determine whether the high failure rate of mergers and acquisitions could be mitigated if managers were better versed in change management theory. Corporate management being a broad subject, of which integration projects are but a small (although increasingly important) part, the difficulties many companies face in integrations suggest that managers are not familiar on how to lead organizations in change. Ashkenas et al (1998) suggest that a reason behind this may be the fact that few organizations face a merger more than once. In fact, during the research process, I seldom ran into an article that discussed integrations and change management. Kotter, Burke and Litwin and Elving only mention smaller change projects, not integrations, which is surprising considering the financial expectations and impact a large-scale integration project can have on an organization, especially considering the high risk involved (Feldman and Spratt, 1999). 
One reason for this may be found by having a closer look at the first phases of an integration, including the ones pre-deal. A study by Datta (1991) suggests that organizations are more interested in research on pre-deal phases, which include extensive due diligence processes, which by themselves are draining both in terms of resources and psychologically. After these phases are complete and the deal signed, many organizations expect the integration to happen by itself. In fact, when the deal is signed, the due diligence managers, who have become experts on the newly acquired organization, are sent away to new similar projects (Ashkenas et al, 1998). If managers were to follow theoretical guidelines from change management litetature, they would include at least a few of these experts in the integration project (the “powerful coalition” as described in Kotter’s model). These experts will have better knowledge at identifying the causes and effects of conflict. As stated in the literature review, a high rate of integration will most likely cause a high level of opposition along with the occasional support, embodied by the four types of actors identified in Krüger’s model. Feldman and Spratt’s (1999) notion that conflict arises from uncertainty rather than change itself combined with with the theoretical framework provided by Krüger’s model could by itself be a powerful tool for change leaders, but evidently many integrations are still managed poorly. As uncertainty has a negative effect on the task integration part of the project, one could therefore speculate that human integration does not receive enough attention.
Disruptions in task integration has been a common theme throughout this paper, with change projects failing at achieveing their goals due to unexpected delays and conflict. Elving’s studies on creating unity by using a communication strategy mirrors the observations that led Birkinshaw et al. (2000) to identify human integration as an important part of an integration project. Human integration and communication could almost be seen as synonymous in this instance, which solidifies Elving’s model as one of the cornerstones of human integration. I have noticed a pattern when studying articles on communication in organizational change: as management contemplates on what information they want to convey in regards to the change process, they often neglect the most common questions. These questions are often of a simple nature regarding the future of jobs, compensation and benefits, while only a small percentage of the workforce is interested in the vision (Feldman & Spratt, 1999) (Elving, 2005) (Ashkenas et al., 1998). This brings into question the importance of certain parts in Kotter’s model that stress the importance of a well communicated vision. Elving’s model has it’s weakness too, as it only describes communication within the organization, while Feldman (1999) stresses the importance of external communication. This translates to keeping clients and investors informed on the project, as integrations are potentially high-cost and high-risk investments. This leads us to external threats to an integration, which is an aspect not touched upon in this paper. Unfortunately, it will have to be included in another study, as various restrictions prevent me from addressing it here.
6. Conclusions, and limitations and suggestions
As the market sees a steady rise in mergers and acquisitions, Ashkenas et al (1998) point out that only a few corporations have prior experience of an integration project. As I have argued in this study, many of the failed integrations could have been redeemed if the managers were familiar with change management theory, dividing the project into task- and human integration, devising a fast and efficient strategy and not shirking communication. It is worth noting that none of the change management models claim complete applicability to such large-scale change projects as integrations. Furthermore, This study is limited to describing internal threats to organizational change. An organization is vulnerable during any large-scale project, integration being no exception. Therefore, it is worth noting that managers should prepare for external disruptions to the process, and that a study on that subject could easily equal this paper in lenght. A prevalent limitation in this study is it’s lack of an empirical study. Although it is possible to form some assumptions based on existing data on failed mergers and studies conducted by others in regard to main reasons for those failures, one should still treat this paper as a suggestion for further study rather than a full-fledged study by itself. As stated earlier, the theoretical models described in this study are mainly aimed towards smaller scale change projects. Furthermore, as most studies on integrations are conducted in the United States, their applicability on a global scale is brought into question. A extensive study on the applicability of traditional change management theories in large-scale integrations on a global scale could be beneficial to both the academic community and organizations. 
