Fundamental indexation in the framework of modern finance theory

1. Introduction
One of the last bastions of capital asset equilibrium based finance is the school of passive, indexed investing.
This simple and elegant strategy relies on the notion that buying and holding the market portfolio is a
superior investment alternative for an average investor. Indexation as an investment strategy has not lost its
appeal even as the foundations of efficient market hypothesis have crumbled in academia and among
practitioners. On the contrary, indexed investing has grown in popularity in recent years as more private and
institutional funds are moved to different indexed investment vehicles, such as index mutual funds and
exchange traded funds (ETFs). According to Investment Company Institute (2010), in the United States
alone, net assets invested in index funds totaled $837 billion in 2009 and index funds share of equity mutual
fund total net assets have risen from 4.0 per cent in 1995 to 13.7 per cent in 2009. The beauty of indexed
investing lies in its conceptual simplicity and compliance with classical finance theory as well as its
characteristic low-cost portfolio construction.

In a 2005 article "Fundamental Indexation" Robert D. Arnott, Jason Hsu and Philip Moore came forth with
the conclusion that the common practice of weighting portfolios by market capitalization is inherently
flawed. They argue that in a noisy1 market environment capitalization-weighted indexation produces
portfolios that allocate more money to overvalued securities and less money to undervalued securities, which
leads to a persistent performance drag. This notion has since gained further acknowledgement from several
finance heavyweights, including Jeremy Siegel, Harry Markowitz, Jack Treynor and the late Peter
Bernstein.

As a solution, Arnott et al (2005) propose a weighting scheme based on company fundamentals, indifferent
of investors subjective valuation that is subject to pricing error and noise created by speculative investors
and momentum traders. This indexation method is said to eliminate the performance drag inherent in cap-
weighted portfolios. Arnott et al (2008) demonstrate that fundamentally weighted portfolios place lower
weight on high valuation multiple companies than cap-weighted portfolios, making the investor less exposed
to price bubbles and, consequently, generating a more satisfying cyclically-adjusted performance.

The "noise-in-price" framework adds another perspective to the discussion of the persistent size- and value
premia in equity market performance in capital markets. On the other side of the argument is the efficient
market camp, who offers rational, risk-based explanations to the equity premium puzzle. The discussion
regarding cap-weighting and valuation-indifferent indexation boils down to the same problem. Theoretical
discussion regarding fundamental indexation has so far been polarized between proponents of the so called
noisy- and efficient market hypotheses. It should also be noted that the most audible advocates of
fundamental indexation (in published research papers) are closely associated with investment management
companies offering fundamental index funds to individual and institutional clients. Whether these papers are
a marketing gimmick or evidence of the claimed superiority of fundamental indexation is inconclusive.

Empirical research based on backtesting of historical data supports the view that fundamental indexation, and
valuation-indifferent index weighting in general, produces more mean-variance efficient portfolios than cap-
weighting, but research on the causality of these excess returns is still lacking. What are the value drivers of
the reported outperformance? Do they stem from pricing errors in the market, as claimed by Arnott et al, or
is a fundamental indexation strategy subject to hidden risks not captured by simple return analysis? Going
forward, this is the most significant research question for investors considering adopting a fundamental
indexation strategy instead of a passive, cap-weighted strategy.

           Contribution

      1.1.Purpose of the study
The purpose of this study is to investigate the theoretical justifications for the claimed outperformance of
valuation-indifferent portfolio weighting relative to a cap-weighted indexation.

      1.2.Structure of the thesis
The paper is organized as follows:


2. The Noisy Market Hypothesis
This chapter presents the fundamental problem in using cap weighting

           Development of EMH and CAPM shortly

A short recap of classical finance theory is necessary to fully grasp the theoretical justification for the
supposed underperformance of cap weighting, also known as noisy market hypothesis.

According to the efficient market hypothesis, the price of every security traded on capital markets represents
the best, unbiased estimate of the true underlying value at all times. This does not mean that mispricing does
not occur, but that it is impossible to distinguish which securities are mispriced through security analysis. It
can be shown that in an efficiently priced market, a capitalization-weighted portfolio offers the best
performance in a mean-variance space.

           Failure of CAPM (market portfolio is not mean-variance efficient)
           relevant anomalies[size(Banz, Keim), value(Basu, Dreman) and momentum(?), other anomalies
           have also been detected

Historical backtesting of following a small cap or value strategy could not be rationalized by existing pricing
models. The magnitude of these excess returns caused turbulence in academia and severely hurt the
credibility of the capital market equilibrium theory developed more than two decades earlier.

           CAPM extensions(multifactor, consumption), hidden risks, behavioral explanations(time varying
           risk premiums))

If prices observed in the market are the best, unbiased estimators of fair market value, a cap-weighted
portfolio will be the superior portfolio choice in the investor opportunity set, but empirical tests on CAPM
show that the cap-weighted equity market portfolio has not been a mean-variance efficient portfolio in the
past. [Ref.]

           equities a poor proxy

There is also a problem with using an equity market portfolio as a basis for CAPM. Theoretically, the CAPM
market portfolio should include all capital assets, non-traded assets included, that are in positive net supply.
Therefore, a market portfolio based on traded equities can be seen as an unfit proxy for an all-asset market
portfolio. (Mayers 1976)

           Background

Taking these inconsistencies with the efficient market hypothesis into notion, it seems rather odd that a large
quantity of investment advisors and investment literature suggest that a casual investor should stick to
following a passive, low-cost indexation strategy based on replicating the return of a broad, well-diversified
equity index. If the CAPM assumptions are not empirically robust, it is highly likely that an investment
strategy based on the assumption that the market portfolio is mean-variance efficient is not the best possible
investment alternative for the casual investor.

           What is noisy market hypothesis

Being in direct opposition to the efficient market hypothesis, the noisy market hypothesis makes the claim
that the observed market price is not always the best, unbiased estimate of the fair market value of a security.
Siegel (2006) argues that price formation in the market is subject to structural disturbances, such as taxes and
liquidity, as well as speculative behavior on part of investors. These unpredictable and temporal shocks,
dubbed as "noise", obscure the intrinsic value of securities. If individual share prices are noisy, this pricing
error will also affect the index weights in cap-weighted indices.

The basic intuition of Arnott et al (2005) argument is this: suppose pricing error is randomly distributed
around the intrinsic value of a stock. In other words, the equity market provides a statistically unbiased "best
guess" of the future discounted cash flows of a stock. In a valuation-indifferent portfolio, such as an equally-
weighted portfolio, portfolio weights are unaffected by the emergence of pricing error in the share prices. In
a reasonably large valuation-indifferent portfolio, the net impact of pricing errors will be negligible as
portfolio holdings are evenly distributed among overvalued and undervalued securities. On the other hand, in
a cap-weighted portfolio, portfolio weights will have a positive correlation with pricing error as overvalued
securities get a larger relative share of the portfolio. If and when share prices revert to their intrinsic value,
cap-weighted portfolios suffer a performance drag due to this correlation.

However, the effect of pricing errors in capital markets on portfolio performance is not an easy subject to
investigate, as the intrinsic value of assets is not observable. Furthermore, there is no assurance that asset
prices ultimately regress to fair value. In this sense, an exacerbation of pricing errors can be favorable to an
investor following a cap-weighted indexation strategy. [Arnott example of cap-weighted outperformance
during booms]

In an efficient market, asset prices would be static and no trading would need to take place, unless new and
unexpected information about the asset emerges. [out of place?]

        Formal mathematical proof (Treynor, Hsu)

It can be shown that in the presence of noise, capitalization-weighted portfolios offer inferior risk-adjusted
returns relative to valuation-indifferent portfolios. Treynor (2005) offers a formal demonstration of the
underperformance of cap-weighted portfolios relative to valuation-indifferent portfolios in a "price in noise"
­framework.

        Mean reversion effect
        Critique of Arnotts rationale

    2.1.Can noise explain the size- and value anomalies?
The noisy market hypothesis offers a possible explanation for the size and value anomalies. [Other studies
claiming pricing inefficiency as source of anomalies?] If a stock price falls because of noise, i.e. without a
change in the company fundamentals, overweighting that stock will probably yield a positive excess return.
Conversely, if a stock price moves up without a change in fundamentals, that stock will probably
underperform. Stocks whose price exceeds their fundamental value become large-cap stocks and therefore
are more likely to underperform (Siegel 2006).

        Risk-based explanation for size- and value effects



3. The case for index investing
This section explains the use of indexing and its pros and cons as an investment strategy

        What is index? -> Arnotts requirements? Discussion (S&P 500) and my own definition (portfolio
        construction method). apply a rule-based rebalancing scheme. FI=portfolio
        What is cap weighting?

In a capitalization-weighted index, each company in the index weighed in accordance with their market
capitalization (i.e. market value or share price times the number of shares outstanding) relative to the total
market capitalization of all companies included in the index. Most of the well known capitalization-weighted
equity indices, such as those developed by Standard & Poors (S&P 500), Russell Investment Group (Russell
1000) or Wilshire Associates (Wilshire 5000), are float-adjusted meaning that the number of shares owned
by company insiders and the government are not taken into account in the calculation of market
capitalization. The aforementioned indices are rebalanced annually. The holdings in the indices do not
necessarily consist of the largest U.S. based companies measured by market capitalization, but instead the
portfolio selection is made by a committee.

Positive traits with cap weighted indexation:

    1. Capitalization weighting is a "buy and hold" strategy that is often associated with low portfolio
        turnover and, hence, generates relatively little trading costs. Stocks in the portfolio are automatically
        rebalanced as the market constantly reconsiders its expectations of a stocks return and riskiness. A
        cap-weighted portfolio requires rebalancing only when there are changes in the constituents in the
        underlying benchmark due to corporate events such as mergers, acquisitions, bankruptcies et cetera.
    2. Cap weighted indices give the largest weight to stocks with high trading liquidity further reducing
        trading costs.
        cap index theoretical justification, elegance, empirical performance, a good measure of the market
        portfolio
        Indexation as an investment strategy (pros & cons)

    Research on long-term equity returns versus and the relatively poor performance of actively managed
    funds performance prompted a demand for indexed investing. The first index fund was set up for
    institutional investors in 1973 and for private individuals in 1976 (Arnott et al. 2008). An argument
    commonly set forth by index fund providers is that actively managed funds seldom can consistently beat
    a cap-weighted market portfolio adjusted for survivorship bias, management fees and trading costs.
    [Ref.] An intuitive explanation for this phenomenon is that if we subtract index funds from the cap-
    weighted market portfolio, were left with a market portfolio collectively owned by actively managed
    funds. Net of costs, this actively managed market portfolio cannot outperform itself.

       Capitalization-weighting is a method to replicate the market portfolio and should the market price assets
       efficiently, given no information asymmetries or other imperfections, this portfolio will offer investors
       the best risk-return combination.

           What is valuation-indifferent weighing?



4. Valuation indifferent indexation
This section explains the rationale behind valuation-indifferent indexation (focus on fund. indexation)

A valuation-indifferent index differs from the cap weighted index in the way that, instead of market
capitalization, the weight of a security included in the index is based on a non-price related metric. The main
idea is to break the link between equity price and index weighing. An example of a valuation-indifferent
weighing scheme is the equal weighting. In this method, every index constituent is given the same index
weight relative to each other. For instance, if a portfolio consists of n stock, each stock will be given the
weight of 1/n in an equally weighted portfolio. The weighting is thus completely unrelated to the individual
stock prices.

           Random weighting?
           What is fundamental indexation? economic weight

The main focus in this thesis is on investigating a concept known as fundamental indexation. Similar to a
cap-weighted portfolio, fundamentally indexed portfolios do not involve security analysis, but instead of
market value the holdings are proportional to a suitable fundamental metric of company size. There is no
definite measure of company size or its significance in the economy. Portfolio managers following a
fundamental index strategy usually measure a companys economic weight using balance sheet data. The
commonly chosen size metrics include: revenue/sales, book value of equity, earnings, cash flow, dividends
and employment. Fundamental indexation as such does not indicate which weighting method is used.
Fundamental indexation is a valuation-indifferent weighting method due as long as the weight metric is
unrelated to the market value of a company.

On a conceptual level, fundamental indexation is a step away from a market-centric approach where
investors view their investment opportunity set relative to the stock market. This approach is supported by
classical finance theory where, given the liberty of some simplifications, stock prices incorporate all
available information concerning expected future cash flows and the risk characteristics of these cash flows.
In this approach, securities traded in the market, at least in the long run, are priced correctly. Instead, Arnott
et al. (2008) prefer to view their indexation method as an economy-centric approach, where portfolio
holdings are weighted according to their relative size in the economy.

      Time       perspective   (estimating   future   performance    vs.   measuring     past    performance),
      subjective(valuation) vs. objective(fundamentals)
      Problem: sector tilts, taxation and structural issues(dividends)
      Solution: to use a composite combining several size metrics
      Arnotts rationale (price randomly distributed around true value and not vice versa)
      Critique
            Asness, Malkiel
            Kaplan, Perold
            Averaging (not current data)
            Wikipedia
            Own critique (no definite metrics, if theory correct success relies on continued irrationality,
              etc.)
      Empirical research
            US evidence (Arnott)
            International evidence
            Evidence from other markets (bonds, real estate)
      Costs

  In contrast to cap weighted portfolios, which rebalance automatically as security prices change,
  fundamentally weighted portfolios are rebalanced periodically. In practice, this means purchasing shares
  in companies whose share price have risen more than the fundamental metric and selling shares in
  companies whose share price has dropped more than the fundamental metric. Rebalancing generates
  trading costs, which depend on rebalancing frequency, portfolio size, market liquidity factors and the
  maximum tracking error a portfolio manager is prepared to tolerate.

      Investing in fundamental indices (in Finland and abroad)



5. Conclusions and summary
      Further theoretical considerations:
             Pricing errors must persist in the future (irrationality of investors, hedge funds etc)
             Strategy not adopted by investment professionals (slow adjustment in the investment
              community
          
