Implementing an Enterprise Resource Planning System

Introduction
Enterprise Resource Planning systems (ERP) have their roots in Material Requirement Planning (MRP) systems that were developed in the 1970’s, and in Manufacturing Resource Planning (MRPII) that emerged from MRP in the 1980’s. In the 1990’s information technology had developed to a stage where it was possible to incorporate all resources of an enterprise into one unified system, and so the development of ERP systems began. Since then, ERPII was developed in the early 2000’s. This study will concentrate on implementation of ERP systems.  (Turner & Weickenannt, 2009)
ERP systems offer a multimodule software system that combines all business processes into one single software system, needing only on database. Implementing an ERP system is very expensive. There is no room for error and if one does occur, it can be very costly to make up for the mistakes. However in today’s competitive market ERP systems are also a measure for gaining competitive advantage. The benefits provided by an ERP system can be broken down into two categories: 1) a unified enterprise view of the business that encompasses all functions and departments; and 2) an enterprise database where all business transactions are entered, recorded, processed, monitored, and reported. (Umble;Haft;& Umble, 2003)
The implementation process has in many cases proven to be everything but simple and straight forward as depicted by ERP vendors. This study intends to clarify the risk and potential benefits that can follow an implementation of an ERP system. The first objective of the research is to identify the most crucial risks when implementing an ERP system. Linking these risks to modules that make part of an ERP system will also make part of this objective. The second objective of the research is to assess what potential benefit that can be gained if an implementation process is successfully done. 
The research will be based on already existing research and data. Due to the fact that implementation of ERP systems has been a current topic for almost twenty years, there exists a substantial amount of research and this will be more than adequate to supply answers for my objectives.
The paper is organized into six sections. The following section explains the different steps for implementing an ERP system and presents a framework for it by Umble, Haftb and Umble (Umble;Haft;& Umble, 2003). This section will also present four additional aspects to take into account when implementing an ERPS. The third section covers potential benefits to be gained from an ERPS. The fifth section consists of an analysis of the results. The final section is conclusions, where the high points of the research are rendered. 
 
2 Implementing an ERP system
Many potential advantages await the managers that are willing to engage the process of implementing an Enterprise Resource Planning System (ERPS). Complete packages that make information flow seamless throughout the organization, the ERPS is indeed a tempting solution for managers that struggle with several old fashioned unsynchronized information systems. Yet, the implementation has proven itself to be anything else but easy. Even defining the success of the implementation has shown to be a difficult task. Some companies have experienced initial signals indicating a successful implementation, just to discover a year later problems that show anything but a successful implementation. Errors like these can prove out to be very costly for the company and is something that any manager wishes to avoid. Unfortunately most of the companies that choose to implement an ERPS encounter errors or delays during their ERPS implementation processes. (Larsen & Myers, 1999)
The company might not only face economic losses. A poorly planned ERPS implementation process can result in disruption in the company’s culture, demand for extensive employee training and even results in declining productivity. In fact research show that 90% of ERPS implementation processes are over budget or delayed. The losses can be extensive and some studies have shown that the losses can be persistent for up to six years. (Umble, Haft, & Umble, 2003)
2.1 Implementation framework
ERP’s offer substantial advantages for them who manage to navigate around the pitfalls which are scattered along the path to success. Achieving a successful implementation isn’t easy. Elisabeth J Umblea, Ronald R Haftb, M.Michael Umblea 2003 have made a framework to in order to make ERPS implementation process more likely to succeed. The framework consists of 11 steps:
	1.	Review the pre-implementation process to date. Make sure the system selection process has been satisfactorily completed and all factors critical to implementation success are in place.
  2.	 Install and test any new hardware. Before attempting to install any software, it is essential to make sure that the hardware is reliable and is running as expected.
   	3.	Install the software and perform the computer room pilot. A technical support person from the software supplier will often install the software and run a few tests to make sure it is installed correctly.
  4.	Attend system training. Software training will teach users the keystrokes and transactions required to run the system.
  5.	Train on the conference room pilot. The conference room pilot exercises the systems and tests the users’ understanding of the system. The project team creates a skeletal business case test environment which takes the business processes from the beginning, when a customer order is received, to the end, when the customer order is shipped.
  6.	Establish security and necessary permissions. Once the training phase is finished, during the conference room pilot, begin setting the security and permissions necessary to ensure that everyone has access to the information they need.
 7.	Ensure that all data bridges are sufficiently robust and the data are sufficiently accurate. The data brought across from the old system must be sufficiently accurate for people to start trusting the new system.
  	8.	Document policies and procedures. The policy statement is a statement of what is intended to be accomplished; the procedural steps to accomplish that statement may be detailed in a flowchart format.
  	9.	Bring the entire organization on-line, either in a total cutover or in a phased approach. In a “cold turkey” approach, the whole company is eventually brought onto the new system. The entire company prepares for the cutover date, which would preferably be during a plant shutdown of one to two weeks. In a phased approach, modules/products/plants are brought on-line sequentially. After the first module/product/plant is live, procedures may be refined and adjusted, then the remaining modules/products/plants are sequentially implemented. The phased approach may allow for improvements to be made during the implementation.
  10.	Celebrate. This can be the most important step. The company has just completed a major project; the celebration recognizes this and clearly demonstrates the importance of the project to the organization.
 11.	Improve continually. The organization can only absorb a limited amount of change during a finite time period. Change is an on-going process; successful companies understand this and encourage their employees to use the system to continue to improve.
(Umble, Haft, & Umble, 2003, ss. 249-250)
2.2 Critical success factors (CSF)
Koh, Gunasekaran, & Goodman conducted a research in an attempt to identify the drivers and barriers for implementing a ERP system.They found that he drivers for implementing ERP system can be acknowledge as strategically or operationally oriented. 
Where it was possible the three objectives (barriers, drivers and critical success factors (CSF)) were analyzed against four perspectives that were affected by an implementation of ERP system. The four perspectives are: vendors/consultants, suppliers, central supply chain enterprises and customers. All of these perspectives had specific need and knew how they would like the ERP system to fulfill these needs. No relationship between the ERP’s CSF and the four perspectives were found. This indicates that it is very hard to distinguish specific ERP CSF at the beginning of a products lifecycle. The research was however capable of identifying CSF that are required by an organization in order to implement an ERP system successfully. (Koh, Gunasekaran, & Goodman, 2011)
According to Tan, Carter-Steel and Toleman (2009) the most important five CSFs are senior management support, relationship with vendors, change in corporate culture and project governance and execution. (Tan, Carter- Steel, & Toleman, 2009). One of the key CSF suggested by research is creating and maintaining collaborative partner relationship. Therefore a good relationship with all the perspectives, that were mentioned earlier, involved in the ERP system is crucial for an ERP implementation to be successful. Other CSF that also should be accounted for are: clear vision, robust planning, organizational resources and project management. (Koh, Gunasekaran, & Goodman, 2011)
For a successful implementation strong leadership and involvement from the top management is needed. The management should have full understanding for ERP systems, be able to rethink the existing business processes and fully support the costs. The management should be seen as a motivating factor as well as a driving force for the rest of the company. (Koh, Gunasekaran, & Goodman, 2011)
2.3 Actors involved in the implementation process
The CSFs can be linked to specific actors that all have their own specific role for making the implementation process a success. However the actors linked to the CSFs are company specific, and are necessarily not the same in all cases for implementation. (Tan, Carter- Steel, & Toleman, 2009) The actors involved in the implementation usually consist of a team that is responsible for the implementation process. Management must communicate frequently with the implementation team, but it is also important that the team has the opportunity to make rapid decision and should therefore be enabled empowered decision making. Usually the team members, the key actors, are information system experts and representatives for the company’s’ different departments and represent the specific need of these departments. The composition of the teamwork is very important throughout the implementation since these actors are responsible for the most important activities. (Francois, Bourgault, & Pellerin, 2009) The team is responsible for the project plan throughout the project. They plan the initial, detailed project plan and are also responsible for the overall schedule. The team also makes sure that all resources needed are available at the time they’re required. (Umble, Haft, & Umble, 2003)
2.4 Budgeting
The problem with any new investment is getting the budgeted right. When implementing a new system it is clear that some kind of roof should be made in order to not have expenses running sky high. IS the primary roof for expenses relevant, should also be considered. The company might have to invest more in the project that they initially estimated, but it is important to have a budget that is somewhat flexible. If the company has already invested money in the project, cost of raising the budget might be smaller than the cost for not investing a bit more in the project. When implementing something that hasn’t been done before that is custom and is being made for a specific purpose, it is very hard to estimate the final cost.
According to research by Hunton, Wright, & Wright (2004) the financial auditors’ were reluctant to consult IT audit during implementation of ERPS. Results showed that risk assessment of an IT-audit compared to a financial audit is significantly higher. This suggests that the type of auditors should interact in order to minimize risk of failure. A reason for the financial auditors’ reluctance to consult IT audits could be explained with an economical factor; when financial auditors consult IT audits this increases their audit costs and since specialists’ fee usually is higher than normal fees, this could be accounted for as a reason. (Hunton, Wright, & Wright, 2004)
In the research done by Hunton, Wright and Wright (2004) the companies had not foreseen a problem like this. By being reluctant to consult the IT audits the financial audits increased the possibility of failure. The problem could have been avoided by adding IT audits to the financial audits team for the implementation process or even budgeting consulting fees in the implementation project. We can conclude that conducting a budget, for the implementation process, correctly is crucial.
2.5 Reengineering the company
As ways of conducting business changes, it is also important to change processes in an organization to support these new ways of conducting business. Producing, collecting and distributing information in an effective way can make a business more productive and more valuable. It might however not be enough to buy fancy computer systems to make an organization more effective.
Granlund & Malmi conducted an interesting research on the topic. The companies that were involved in the research were all in the implementation face of an ERPS. All of the companies had only implemented the technical part of the system without changing the old processes. They were only speeding up the old process with better software. A reason for this was given as an economical factor. The companies thought that it would be too expensive to change processes and implement a new system at the same time. The managers seemed to be afraid of the risk involving implementation and possible mistakes that could turn out to be very costly. I wonder if they thought about what could potentially be gained if both technical and more practical change would have been done at the same time. It is risky but as any investment done, the risk of failure and victory should be calculated so that the possible gain or loss can be measured in hard numbers. Implementing one face at the time might be less risky, but is it really less expensive and how much could the company gain if the implementation would be successful for both parts? (Granlund & Malmi, 2002)
 
3 Benefits to be gained from a successful implementation
The benefits provided by ERP’s can be broken down into two categories: 1) a unified enterprise view of the business that encompasses all functions and departments; and 2) an enterprise database where all business transactions are entered, recorded, processed, monitored, and reported. (Umble, Haft, & Umble, 2003) This section will cover what kinds of benefits an implementation can bring a company.
3.1 ERP benefits in five dimensions
Most of the benefits gained from an ERPS implementation can be accounted for as decreased in the company’s expenses and in an overall increased efficiency. Shang and Seddon (2002) present benefits gained by an ERP implementation in five dimensions. The five dimensions accounted for are:
Operational
Managerial
Strategic
IT infrastructure
Organizational
Operation benefits are mainly reduction of cost and cycle time. Faster cycle time means that less labor hours is needed for producing a product. By minimizing cycle times more products can be made in a shorter time space. The produced products become cheaper for the company by increased efficiency and hence adding to better results. Managerial benefits are better performance, decision making and resource management. ERP system enables the managers to have information in real time. Informed managers are able to more accurate assessments of a situation and make better decisions for the company. Strategic benefits can be accounted for as the new system allows the managers to develop better strategic plans for the company. IT infrastructure experiences benefits by cost reduction and increased capability. Organizational benefits can be seen as a change in processes, employee empowerment and in increased moral and satisfaction of the employees. (Shang & Seddon, 2002) For example Granlund & Malmi found that an ERPS implementation made it possible for accountants to spend less time doing routine tasks and more time analyzing data. In some cases the accountants were given new tasks and in some cases this even led to a reduction of accountants in the companies. (Granlund & Malmi, 2002)
3.2 Estimating value gained by an ERPS implementation
One of the most interesting issues of accounting and information systems is the measuring of value of Information Technology (IT). Several researchers have tried to come up with a measurement that would properly reflect the value increase that is due to an ERPS implementation. So far research has not made a significant breakthrough. The topic is still being explored.
Davern and Wilkin (2010) explored two approaches to estimate the value that can be gained from a successful implementation. The first approach is objective approach. The data is based on hard numbers such as, capital market reactions and comparative analysis of published financial reports. The problem is that a change in market value is hard to connect directly to the change in IT as market value is constantly affected by other news at the market as well. Is the change in market value really a result of IT related managerial decision, or is it a result of some other noise on the market. (Daver & Wilkin, 2010)
Evaluate if an implementation has been successful can be a difficult and cumbersome task. The problem is defining what success is. Researchers have tried to resolve this problem by benchmarking and by setting certain goals for specific attribute. Thomas (2007) conducted a research in which the result showed that the greatest reductions are made in scheduling and planning (50 %), reduction in production time (10 %), in inventory (10 %) and in delayed delivery times (25 %). The research also showed that the companies that implemented an ERP system managed to meet their return on investment in 32, 5 % of the time and reach their attributes 14, 3 % of the time. (Thomas, 2007)
The second approach explored by Davern and Wilkin (2010) is based on behavioral science. The idea is that the end-users and stakeholders are to provide a better assessment of what value the implementation of an IT system adds to the product. The problem here however is that human judgment cannot be seen as an objective measurement, and can be stated as a perceptual measurement. Even though researchers haven’t been able to conduct a research that could supply accurate results on this topic it should be recognized that value is created on this level as well.  (Daver & Wilkin, 2010) A business organizations task is to create value and then capture as much of that value as it can and handing it over to the owners. Giving the end user more value can however result in a better relationship with the customer. If the company manages to gain the customers loyalty, chances are higher the “old consumer” will become a new costumer again. If so, the company has managed to establish a long-term relationship with the consumer and this relationship will show monetary benefit several times for the company. This is why an integrated research is crucial for estimating value. Once created, the value created does exist. We just have to find a way to see all of it.
4 Analysis and discussion
Who captures the value that is created by IT? The question is hard to answer because the stakeholders probably will assess the value differently than managers or think that no value was added at all. This makes measuring value in terms of hard numbers very hard. The value in the stock price might not show after implementation, since the increase in efficiency isn’t shown in the company’s result the very next balance sheet, due to the cost of investment. Despite this, the value created for the owners is probably still the easiest value to estimate. By comparing residual income before a managerial IT decision, an estimation of value increase or decrease is gained. The question remains if we can consider this to be reliable since the stock prices could also be influenced by other noises on the market as well. 
The main question that arises when reading this essay is: Is implementing an ERP system worth the risks? Obviously this is a question that no research can provide an absolute answer for.  The advantages that can be gained depend on to which extent a company is willing to implement the system. As previously shown only 32, 5 % meet their return on investment. This is a very small number that implies that the investment in ERP system in the majority of times leads to economic losses. Greater benefits can be gained if the company chooses to implement both the technical part of the system and change their processes. It all comes down to how much risk the managers and the shareholders are willing to take. With greater risk comes greater victory, but if failure is meet it will be equally destructive for the company.
The future trend in enterprise systems are leaning towards greater SC collaboration and is more web orientated. (Tan, Carter- Steel, & Toleman, 2009) I suggest that if one of the key CSFs is the relationship the organization has with its perspectives, more studies should be made also from the perspectives point of view. Most of the studies made, concerning implementation of ERP systems, are made from the implementing organizations point of view. I suggest that more research need to be done with focus on developing lean relationships with collaborating partners.
5 Conclusions
The companies of today have adjusted to the new ways of doing business. Keeping up with the new ways of, for example, serving customer on the internet has forced companies to accept new innovated ideas. During the last twenty years managers have turned to information systems in hope to create a more competitive business. ERP systems offer a multimodule software system that combines all business processes into one single software system, needing only on database. The potential benefits to be gained can definitely increase the company’s competitive advantage but it comes at a price. The risks are equally high and potential errors have high chance of becoming very costly.
In this essay we have explored a framework for ERPS implementation by Umble, Haft, & Umble (2003). In addition to the framework the essay also gaised uppon four other aspects to consider during an implementation. The therd section rendered benefits to be gained when an ERPS is implemented successfully. The section also covered reseach done on estimation of the value created due to an implemenatation of an ERP system. The fourth section offered an analytical diskussion of the findings. We concluded that estimating the created value by an ERP implementaiton is, for time being and measures availble, a very difficult task that is yet to be conqured.
