Bankruptcy of Russian tour operators: reason and possible solutions

Introduction
Tourism is now one of the leading industries in several countries, being both the main employer and the largest source of income there. Despite the fact that the development of tourism industry requires a lot of investment; it stimulates to evolve other sectors of economy: construction, service, trade, agriculture, etc. 
Tourism in Russia is one of the most rapidly developing and profitable sectors of national economy; nevertheless, it faces a lot of difficulties nowadays. Considering the influence of tourism on other industries, it is essential to develop this sector in order to diversify Russian economy and ensure the stable growth in the future.
Tourism industry is like a coin and has two sides: inbound and outbound tourism. On the one hand, problems seem to exist only within inbound sector: the shortage of investment and appropriate infrastructure is aggravated by the deficiency in legislation and the necessity to determine private property rights. This problem is discussed widely in Russian academic and business circles, though heated arguments on the reasons which prevent Russian tourism industry from developing still exist.
On the other hand, outbound tourism in Russia seems to be a prosperous sector of national economy.  During the last ten years this branch has experienced a dramatic rise, with Russians being better-off and the number of tourists increasing every year. Package tours to Turkey, Egypt, Greece or Spain are the most popular and convenient way for Russian citizens to spend their holiday especially because of low prices. As consequence, recently the number of tour operators in the country has soared; competition between them being increased significantly. However, this year a number of tour operators in the country have become bankrupt; this fact has revealed problems in outbound tourism branch, considering especially the size of the companies. 
Due to the high cost of tours within Russia and low level of infrastructure, the majority of citizens prefer going abroad; which, consequently, leads to the rise in the number of tour operators and tour agencies. According to Russian Federal State Statistics Service (Rosstat) the number of trips abroad rose by 15% last year against 2010. Taking this fact into account, a number of bankruptcies of tour operators, occurred during the recent year, seems to be obscure, illogical, and groundless. 
Nowadays this topic is widely discussed in Russia, but there is no single opinion on both the reasons for the bankruptcies and the possible effect on the economy of the country. Some people believe that the insolvency is the result of economic downturn and these incidents will not affect the whole tourism industry of the country. Others think that the current situation is an evidence of serious problems in Russian tourism industry and predict that bankruptcies will continue. 
Nevertheless, the insolvency of country’s major tour operators cannot be ignored as it definitely signals for some problems of the national economy which can affect its state in the future. However, in order to find the proper solution it is necessary, first of all, to state the real reasons for the current situation.
As the topic of the insolvency of Russian tour operators is a recent one, there are no researches or theoretical works on this subject. That is why articles in newspapers, magazines, and journals are the only sources of information on this matter which implies too subjective approach to the problem. Although this paper is intended to be a review of different articles written on the topic in question, it will also provide the author’s own opinion as well as statistics data.
The paper investigates the likely reasons for insolvency of tour operators in Russia, the possible consequences for both the tourism industry and the national economy, and the solutions to the problem which are likely to be implemented.

An overview of the series of insolvency of Russian tour operators

The first bankruptcy, which initiates the chain of insolvency of Russian tour operators, occurred in November, 2011.  “Capital Tour”, the third largest tour operator in the country with income of more than 16 billion roubles in 2009 (Ria Novosti, «??????? ???», ??????? 15.11.2010), announced the temporary default on its obligations; the overall debt of the company being more than 1.3 billion roubles (www.BFM.ru, «??????? ???» ????? 50 ????? ???????? ????????, 17.10.2010). This incident affected 8.3 thousand people ("???????????", ?162 (4947), 31.08.2012) who lost their tourist vouchers as well as those who had difficulties in returning back to Russia, as their hotel reservations and airplane tickets were not paid. 
The overall debt of the tour operator amounted to 1.3 billion roubles and among its creditors were nine banks, several tour agencies, “Red Wings” air company and even an insurance company. ("???????????", ?162 (4947), 31.08.2012) Although the liability of the tour operator itself was insured with “Innogarant”, the total amount of insurance coverage – 100 million roubles (www.tourprom.ru, ?????????? ???????? ??????? ?????? ???????? «??????? ????», 17.12.2010) – was insufficient to repay the debts and even to compensate the losses, which bore company’s customers.
“Capital tour”, being one the largest tour operators in Russia with turnover of more than 16.1 billion roubles and annual tourist flow of 2 million people, was the first warning of problems, existing in the industry. The incident made Russian tourism industry union think about revising the regulation concerning financial guarantees for tour operators.
However, the insolvency of “Capital Tour” was followed by a series of less noticeable financial collapses of smaller tour operators and at the end of January, 2012 another major company in Russian tourism industry - “Lanta-tour” -  also became bankrupt. As the result, more than three thousand people were left abroad with no possibility to return home; and another 8 thousand lost their tour vouchers.
Founded in 1991, “Lanta-tour” was one of the oldest tour operators in Russia and according to the ranking of 2009 the company was the 17th largest on the market with annual turnover of 3.3 billion roubles (www.utro.ru ???? «?????-???» ???????? ?????? ????????, 28.01.2012). “Lanta-tour” faced difficulties when “Master Bank” refused to accommodate the company with another loan, which led to the shortage of working capital and inability of the tour operator to pay for hotels and airplane tickets for its customers. The liability of “Lanta-tour” was insured with “Ingostrach” company for the amount of 100 million roubles, though it was not sufficient even to compensate its customers the losses they incurred. The overall debt of the tour operator amounted to 1.1 billion roubles (www.vz.ru, ??? ???????? «?????-???» ??????? ?????????, 28.09.2012).
The insolvency of “Capital tour” was quite expected, as there were rumours about the poor financial standing of the company for about a year before the incident. Despite this fact the bankruptcy of “Lanta-tour” was a surprise. Considering the fact that “Lanta-tour” was one of the oldest and largest players on the market; the reputation of Russain tour operators was tarnished, and a severe problem in the industry in question was revealed. 
Later during this year a number of smaller tour operators also announced the temporary default on their obligations. In April the tour operator “ITC”, based in Moscow, was not able to pay its debts, which affected around 100 Russian tourists being abroad at that time. That month another operator “The ideal world” was accused of fabricating air tickets, causing the problem for 200 Russian people in going to Israel or coming home. 
Two months later, in June, tour operator “Around the world”, which specialized in the countries of South-East Asia, informed about the suspension of the activity due to financial obligation problems. 
In the end of August about 200 Russian citizens being on holiday in Egypt were not able to leave the country because of financial problems of “El Voyage” tour operator. Only several days after “CherryTour” company and several dozens of its clients faced the same difficulties in Croatia. The most recent case of bankruptcy occurred in September with tour operator “Global Travel”, which also faced financial difficulties and ceased operations. 
All above mentioned incidents taken place after January, 2012 did not result in insolvency of tour operators because of relatively small size of the companies. Their insurance coverage was big enough in order to settle their debts. Nevertheless, this chain of insolvency signifies some problems both in tourism industry in Russia and in the way tour operators conduct their financial activity. Moreover, the two big companies “Capital Tour” and “Lanta-tour” became bankrupt; which definitely indicates serious problems in the industry.
  
The reasons for insolvency

An overview of Russian tourism market will contribute to better understanding of the factors caused the series of insolvency of companies operating in the industry in question.
Nowadays tourism industry in Russia is one of the most rapidly developing, annual growth rates being 10-25% since 2004 (www.svobodanews.ru, ??????? ???? ??????? ? ???????? ? «?????-???», 3.02.2012). It experienced an insignificant decrease in 2008-2009 due to the world economic downturn; nevertheless, next years there was again an increase in growth rates, though not as big as the previously. 
Russian tourism market is also characterized by a cut-throat competition, the number of tour operators and agencies being more than two thousand. Consequently, tourism industry of the country can be called a buyer’s market, i.e. supply exceeds demand and tourists themselves dictate terms. Taking into consideration relatively low average income in Russia (21000 roubles ˜ 530 euros, Rosstat, 2009), price is the main factor defining customer’s preferences for certain tourism directions. Thereby, the only way for tour companies in Russia to attract as many clients as possible is to reduce prices.
Although each case of insolvency of Russian tour operators is unique, according to the majority of experts there is one common cause – dumping prices. 
Tour operators as well as tour agencies have got used to steadily increasing market, though they were overcautious in 2009 and reduce the volume of sales, thus operated in the black that year. However, in the hope of rapid recovery of the market in 2010 they overestimated their abilities and booked too many air tickets and hotels. As the result, only part of tours was sold and companies had to reduce the price as much as possible. According to the data of Russian tour operators association the profitability of tourism business in the country in 2011 decreased to 2-3% against 5-6% previously.
Tour operators have been using dumping prices for many years already, but the scheme proved to be a failure only after the crisis years of 2008-2009. 
Tour operators have three main sources of income for conducting their activity. The first one is the money a company gets from its customers. Usually a tour operator books rooms in hotels and charters before the tourist season, paying large amounts of money in advance. Although sold tour packages are supposed to compensate for the cost, sometimes companies do not manage to sell all tours. In this case a tour operator does not obtain enough working capital; and when paying for a tour, tourists usually cover expenses of someone else’s tour. Consequently, tour operators work in the hope that the amount of future customers will be sufficient to compensate for cost of previous tours as well as to prepay for following ones. Thereby, if a company overestimates future growth of the market, it is likely to become bankrupt or at least face grave financial difficulties.
Second way of obtaining money is increasing receivables. Tour operators make long-term contracts with air companies and hotels, accumulating debts and paying them off when receiving money from customers. Usually both air companies and hotels are willing to wait for tour operators to settle their debts as they are constant suppliers of customers for them. However, sometimes an air company or a hotel are not ready to wait any longer and cancel a contract with a tour operator, which can eventually lead to insolvency of the latter.
The third way is to obtain a bank loan. This is more typical for large companies with big turnover and annual income. Banks are usually eager to cooperate with major tour operators, though for companies it is the most risky way because of high interest rate.
All above mentioned cases are the usual way of conducting business in Russian tourism industry. Although it may suit an increasing market, it is definitely inappropriate in times of economic crisis.
Furthermore, as mentioned before tour operators use dumping prices in order to attract customers and occupy sufficient market share. According to Irina Tuyrina, a spokesman of Russian tour industry union, 40-45% of all tours in the country are sold lower than the breakeven point. Usually tour operators use dumping prices in the most popular directions expecting to compensate it by the volume of sales and selling less popular but more expensive tours. In Russia dumping prices are typical for package tours to Turkey, Egypt, Greece and Thailand. 
Dumping is also a common way for a tour operator to develop new directions as well as for a new a company to enter the market.
In order to reduce price for their products tour operators also cooperate with companies which provide discount coupons. That was the cause of financial problems of “El voyage” and “Ideal world” tour operators: discount coupon companies sold their tours and did not transfer the money in time, so the tour operators were not able to settle their debts.
Over abundant supply on Russian tourism market results also in increase of sale of last minute tours, which is a popular way for tour operators to attract customers. Provided that the situation in the industry is characterized as the buyer’s market and tourists in Russia are getting accustomed to cheap package tours; it is becoming more and more difficult for tour operators to make profit, as they have to sell their goods at breakeven point level or even lower.
Although dumping prices are considered to be the main reason for the series of insolvency of tour operators in Russia, the majority of players on the market have been using this scheme for many years already. It is proved to be a failure only after the world economic downturn of 2008 when tour operators overestimated their abilities and did not react to the situation in an appropriate way. Thereby, the economic crisis has helped Russian tourism market to some extent, as it revealed grave problems in the industry and the necessity of restructuring of the whole industry. According to experts, first of all, Russian tourism market has to abandon using last minute tours. Furthermore, all financial transactions should become official, and the amount of financial provision of the players on the market should be increased.
