Employment training – The relationship between a new employee and a trainer

1 INTRODUCTION

To teach someone does not mean that the other part has learnt it.  In many companies managers have the attitude that if someone has taught a task to an employee once then the employee has to know it. This kind of atmosphere does not support learning at work. Learning in companies can happen in many different ways: On the job training, coaching/mentoring, formal education, training courses, conferences. External materials such as videos, CD-ROMs, books and intranets can also be used to support learning. (Gibb 2002:13) Focus should be placed in companies on the important relationship between the trainer and the employee. Workplace trainers, who may be colleagues or supervisors, help employees learn what they need to know and do in order to get their job done.(Poell, Van der Krogt, Vermulst, Harris, Simons 2006:175)The relationship that employees have with their trainer is the most important when it comes to learning at work. Employee learning is a shared responsibility that involves the employee, the leader, and the organization as a whole. (Bezuijen, van Dam, van den Berg, Thierry 2010:689)
Sloman (2007:145) sees that the relationship between trainers and learners should be studied more closely. Most research to date has focused attention on formal educators. The role of informal workplace trainers have been neglected earlier in studies.Studies examining employee training and learning have shifted the focus from formal training to informal training and learning in the workplace and to ways in which these can be enhanced.(Poell et.al. 2006:175f) The importance of studying informal educators has grown as the relationship between the trainers and employees has become closer. (Sloman 2007:146) Despite that training strategies at work have been widely studied only few researchers have studied the relationship between the trainer and the employee.Giangreco, Sebastiano and Peccei (2009:107) have studied important predictors of overall training satisfaction. Their findings were against the widely held view that perceived trainer performance is the most important predictor of overall training satisfaction. The study by Giangreco et.al (2009:107) indicated that perceived usefulness of training was the strongest predictor of training satisfaction. It was followed by perceived trainer performance and the perceived efficiency of training. Even if these findings imply that trainer performance is not the strongest predictor training satisfaction, I believe that trainer performance is the most important thing that affect employee learning.
Many authors agree that support from the leader enhances participation in learning activities (Birdi et al., 1997; Colquitt, LePine, &Noe, 2000). Colquitt et al.’s (2000:700) meta-analytic study showed that employee motivation to learn was related to the working environment and leader’s supportive behaviors. Despite this evidence, surprisingly few studies have examined the underlying process between leaders and employees that results in employee learning. (Bezuijen, van Dam, van den Berg, Thierry 2010:675)
Many authors (Gibb 2002, Sloman 2007, Urbaniak 2004) write about the relationship between an employee and a trainer, but they have not studied how the relationship itself affects the learning. The question remains: How does the relationship between the trainer and the employee affect learning? What kind of tasks do employees feel that they learn better thanks to a good trainer? This paper expands current research by focusing on the relationship between the trainer and the new employee. Applying existing literature and by performing qualitative inquiry I seek to find deeper knowledge within this area. This study is important because many companies forget their new employees and do not take advantage of their employees´ full capacity. One reason to this is poor training by poor trainers. The results from this study can help companies to understand to importance of trainers and in which types of jobs close trainer-employee relationshipsare particularly important.This paper is structured as follows. First, after the introductionpart theories within employee learning will be presented. Second, the data collection methods and the sample will be discussed. After that the results will be presented and finally the findings will be discussed.

1.1 Aim
The purpose of this study is to investigate how the relationship between the trainer and the new employee affect learning at work.  A main issue in this study is to examine the importance of the relationship between the informal trainer and a new employee, and how the trainer affects how well the employee learns new things.  I will not study the benefits that companies get from effective learning strategies, because the learning itself and how it takes place is more important for my study. Without knowing how to teach new employees in the best possible way, companies will not get maximum capacity out of their employees and in that way more efficiency in the company. The field of study is human resource management, as personnel issues is vital part of it.I believe that this study is relevant for both the academic community and companies. Companies are interested in information can improve their employment training. I believe that my study can also provide the academic community with relevant information on the relationship between the employee and the trainer.   



2 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TRAINER AND EMPLOYEE

2.1 Employees and trainers
Employees are core actors in the learning system of an organization. Employees learn new things daily as they prepare, carry out, control, and adjust different activitieson the job. Employees engage in their learning in many different ways. They think about their learning needs, find out their preferred learning styles, see learning opportunities available in their jobs, participate in training and education, study literature by themselves, form learning communities with colleagues from their own organization, reflect on their work experiences, and evaluate what they have learned from certain activities. (Poell et.al 2006:178)Toivonen and Asikainen(2004:34f)think that being an apprentice is a good and fast way to learn things at a job. It is much faster than learning by yourself, thus learning individually always needs trial and error before you learn things. Research indicates that most employees view e-learning as the least effective form of development while training that involve interaction, such as coaching,mentoring, and on-the-job training rank as the most effective strategies. This is because people prefer to learn directly from other people. (Strategic direction 2011:14f)

Poell et.al (2006:191) identified three types of informal workplace trainers with different role conceptions:  1) a relatively small group (13 percent) with a passive role conception who provide little support, offer little structure, and pay little attention to employee work performance; 2) a considerable number of informal workplace trainers (38 percent) with a restricted role conception, offering little structure and average support and attention to performance; and 3) a large group(49 percent) of respondents with a broad, active role conception, who provideda lot of support and structure and emphasized performance as well. In terms oftheir role conceptions, the third type had most in common with formal educators. The role conception that the informal workplace trainer has will affect positively the employee´s learning. The study by Poell et.al (2006:192) indicated that informal workplace trainers who were enterprise owners showed higher levels of support, structure, and focus on performance than non-owners. The same was informal workplace trainers who had been prepared with at least one formal preparatory course.Urbaniak (2004:6f) has written five good tips for trainers for on the job training: 1) get trainee ready to learn 2) break down the work into components and identify the key points 3) demonstrate the proper way to work 4) let the trainee perform the work and 5) put trainees on their own gradually.

2.2. The relationship between trainers and employees

A good relationship between a trainer and an employee correlates with important employee and organizational outcomes such as job performance, organizational citizenship behavior, job satisfaction, organizational commitment, retention, and openness to organizational change. (Bezuijen, van Dam, van den Berg, Thierry 2010:675f)Employee learning is generally considered an essential criterion for organizational adaptability and competitiveness. Even if employee learning is the foundation for continuity in companies, little is known about how leaders encourage employees to engage in learning activities. Researchers have not succeeded to explain the specific behaviors and mechanisms through which such learning occurs (Bezuijen, van Dam, van den Berg, Thierry 2010:673)Though, there are various channels and sources for learning at work, it ismainly the work content and the relationships among colleagues andsupervisors that determine the workplace learning opportunities availableto employees. Colleagues play an important role for learning, as employees participate in collaborative learning and share experiences and knowledge with each other. (Poell et.al 2006:178)The relationship between trainers and employees has become much closer. A close relationship is preferable for behavioral and attitudinal change, but the downside of a closer relationship is that it is time expensive. (Sloman 2007:146) 

Typical problems with in trainer-employee learning are: trainers´ inaccurate perceptions of learners, training readiness of the trainee, poor communication between these two, and misunderstandings between these two. (Gibb 2002:17) Another problem is that the trainer has too much to do and forgets or has not time for his role as a trainer. Trainers can sometimes also overestimate the skills of their new employees. It is important to remember for trainers that new employees might not know at all how to use some computer programs or it takes time to learn them properly. That is why it is important for trainers to both show and tell how to do their tasks. (Urbaniak 2004:6f) The positive effects that the employee gets from learning face-to-face are: benefit of others´ experience, a relaxed and informal setting to learn in, the characteristics of the situation are real, customized to individual learning concerns, and happens in a supportive environment. (Gibb 2002:17) A company must remember that it is the learner himself or herself who will determine the progress in learning. Companies can only try to create a best possible environment that enables, encourages and supports learning. (Sloman 2007:99-102, Bezuijen, van Dam, van den Berg, Thierry 2010:688f)  The ultimate tasks for companies are to enable learners to enjoy the process and recognize goals, convince learners that they can achieve the goals, and be aware of the employees´ learning progress. For the learning to be as successful as it should be companies must also emphasize positive feelings that learning achievements bring. (Strategic decisions 2011:14) Trainers could further emphasize all the benefits of training such as increased work performance, better career mobility, potential increases in salary or promotions. (Colquitt 2000:700)
3 METHOD

In this chapter the data collection methods will be discussed and how the study was performed. Chosen methods will also be justified.

3.1 Data collection and interviews
This study focuses mostly at learning as social practice. People who see learning as a social practice argue that learning is more effective when it arises and is applied in a social setting. (Sloman 2007:100) A qualitative study method was chosen to best support the study purpose. The qualitative study method used is interviews, because interviews are the best way to get information about employees’ attitudes and thoughts about their learning in companies. A general interview guide approach will be used in the data collection (Patton 2002:342f).The questions in the interview guide will be open-ended so that the respondents can answer the questions in own words and explain thoroughly about their learning in companies. Five respondents will be interviewed in this study. Respondents will not be informed that the trainer-employee relationship is the key issue in this study so that their answers will not be affected. 

3.2 Sampling
Criterion sampling will be used to choose the respondents in this study. Criterion sampling(Patton 2002:238) means that the researcher has chosen a criterion that all respondents must to meet to be able to be interviewed. The respondents in this study will be chosen with the criterion that they have had an own trainer when they started their job.Because of the nature of qualitative research it acceptable to have smaller samples in qualitative research than in quantitative.(Patton 2002:227-230)The information richness of the selected cases and the analytical and observational skills of the researcher can give interesting and meaningful results even in cases with small sample sizes (Patton 2002:245). Criterion sampling ensured that the respondents in this study would be able to discuss the relationship between them and their trainer.

3.3. Analysis
The data received from the interviews will be categorized in the analysis so that bigger issues and constructs can be examined further. The purpose of categorization is to identify a chunk or unit of data belonging to a more general phenomenon. The phenomenon that the researcher identifies are then given labels and names. (Spiggle 1994:493)This will be done by gathering the most interesting data from the interviews in tables and then by comparing the answers and trying to find categories. These categories will then be the important data that will be the basis of the analysis. I will also move back and forth between the different stages when doing the analysis. This is called iteration. (Spiggle 1994:493–495)

4 RESULTS
Companies needto understand that learning does not happen overnight, it is a continuous processthat lasts as long as an employee works in a particular company.The answers from the respondents indicate that the trainer-employee-relationship has a vital role when it comes to employee learning. The respondents´ answers indicated that there are many reasons why close and informal relationships improve employee learning. First, employees can ask and have the courage to ask for help in these relationships, because they feel that there are not that big hierarchical distance between them and the trainer.Most respondents said that they could also ask stupid questions thanks to the informal relationship. Second, employees feel much more supported when they have a trainer that is available for them. The support from colleagues seemed to be almost as important as the support from the trainer. 
The respondents had different opinions about if it matters if the trainer is a boss or a colleague. Some respondents thought that they would not have had ask as many questions if their trainer was their boss, because they would not have wanted to show that they cannot do certain things. Others did not see it as any problem to have a boss as a trainer. Respondent C had a good thought about the role of the trainer. She said: “It has more to do with the person, not his title”.
The relationship between the trainer and the employee is particularly important in the beginning when the employee does not know any other employees. All relationships at work affect learning, though the trainer seems to have the biggest role as the employee interacts mostly with him/her. Also colleagues and bosses, that do not have the trainer role, play an important role in the learning environment and the new employees learning. Respondent B explained well the importance of relationships at work – “I think that in offices learning is best when it comes through interaction”. The importance of learning through interaction is particularly important at work because tasks are many times more practical in work than in school. To learn from an trainer through discussions help the new employee to learn how things have been done without difficult theoretical explanations. 
5 CONCLUSION

