Financing and funding relief aid supply chains
Introduction

In academic literature, humanitarian logistics has synonyms; the termslike “relief aidoperations”, “disaster recoverylogistics” and “emergency supply chains”all share the same meaning. (Kovacs&Spens: 2005: 100-101) A well quoted description on humanitarian logistics is that it entails “the process of planning, implementing and controlling the efficient, cost-effective flow and storage of goods and materials as well as related information, from the point of origin to the point of consumption for the purpose of meeting the beneficiary’s requirements.” (Thomas&Mizushima, 2005) While the beneficiary in the case of commercial supply chains is arguably the end-customer, it has been discussed whether the beneficiary in relief aid logistics is the relief aid receiver – or the relief aid donor. (Kovacs; 2011)

According to several articles, the importance of well functioning humanitarian supply chains grew due to the Indian Ocean Tsunami aftermath in 2004. The disaster generated massive, even superfluous, donations that needed to be managed to avoid bottlenecks in deliveries. (Thomas&Kopczak: 2010: 1-2) Thomas and Mizushima mention the ”cost-effective flow of goods and materials” defining humanitarian logistics and Jahre and Heigh talk about the three main flows in relief aid logistics: materials, information and funding.(Thomas&Mizushima: 2005; Jahre&Heigh: 2008: 2) This would imply to that financing and funding relief aid operations would be of great importance, especially regarding the fact that while the economic losses at natural and human-generated disasters are growing, the actual number of natural disasters expected to occur have been on the rise. (Thomas&Kopzcak: 2005: 1-3) However, little has yet been written academically on the actual cost-efficiency on relief aid operations (Jahre&Heigh, 2008: 1). These issues make this topic interesting and highly important. This article will start off by defining the humanitarian sphere and the supply chain that is needed to support humanitarian operations. This leads to presenting the measures of funding humanitarian operations and the challenges that humanitarian operations face regarding funding and monetary usage. After that I will present different thoughts on what needs to be done in order to improve measures of funding humanitarian operations. 

Approximately 80% of humanitarian operations consist of logistics operations. (vanWassenhove: 2006: 475) This is why this paper also holds a supply chain approach on relief operations. Donations, funding and financial planning are also an important part of not only humanitarian operations, but also for the humanitarian supply chain to function. The aim of this paper is to provide aloose framework for defining the measures used in funding and financing relief aid. The aim is, however, not to determine the monetary flows as such in humanitarian operations, but instead to paint a more overall picture on how funding is spent in humanitarian operations. The aim is also to try to define the measures in relief aid funding that could be improved, as well asto present new aspects and theories that could be used in relief aid operations funding. This paper is built on information gathered from both academic and practitioner literature. The paper is built up on the following research questions: What defines funding in humanitarian relief aid supply chains? Which measures do we need to take to improve future funding of humanitarian operations?
Humanitarian supply chains
When defining humanitarian action, three principles often prevail: humanity, neutrality, and impartiality. These values originate from the establishment of the Red Cross Movement in 1857. (vanWassenhove: 2009: 20) Humanitarian aid can be described as consisting of both disaster relief, as wellas more ongoing support for developing regions, the main issue being to aid people in their survival. When it comes to the measures needed to be taken, in both disaster relief and the support for developing regions, there are big differences in how to go about. (Kovacs &Spens: 2007: 101-106)

Kovacs and Spens (2007) explain humanitarian operations by categorizing the humanitarian effort according to their purpose. The preparatory phasedefines the precautionary work done before a disaster strikes. Preparation can entail regional preparations in disaster prone areas through e.g. improving infrastructure or building stocks of supplies needed in disasters in a centralized manner. The demand detected from previous disasters can come into use here. The Immediate response phase is often considered being actual humanitarian aid: immediate response comes into action once the disaster strikes. Several organisations only focus on this phase in their work. The immediate response phase entails managing both demand and supply: challenges here are e.g. determining demand, coordinating supply and the managing the last mile in aid transportation. The third phase, the Reconstruction phase takes place once the immediate response phase reaches to a certain closure. The reconstruction phase includes the reconstruction of the disaster struck area. In all phases of disaster and humanitarian operations infrastructure and the level of economic development in the region plays a considerable part: the more sustainable the underlying structure, the quicker the recovery from the disaster. (Spens& Kovacs: 2007: 101-106) However, once a disaster has hit a community, the underlying human needs can often be derived from the Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, no matter where disaster strikes: there will be an initial need for food, water, safety, shelter and affection in order for the person to carry on. (adapted from a lecture by Paul D. Larson 2011. Originally Maslow: 1943) 

Logistics play a crucial role in humanitarian operations. Like mentioned, it is estimated that supply chain operations cover 80 % of the humanitarian operation, linking together humanitarian operations, logistics and funding. (Wassenhove: 2006: 475) Similar to humanitarian operations, supply chain responses can be classified according to their purpose in the current situation. Apermanent supply chain can be considered being in action during the preparatory phase, while anemergency supply chain is set up during the immediate response phase. The project supply chain is considered consisting of more planned humanitarian efforts, fitting the reconstruction phase. (Jahre&Heigh: 2008: 6-7) 
Funding humanitarian supply chains

The humanitarian supply chain consists of funding (or financial flows)as well as material flows, information flows, people and manpower, as well as knowledge and skills (von Wassenhove: 2009: 5). Funding goes partially hand in hand with donations, which do not necessarily need to entail financial measures entirely: a lot of donations are done in e.g. different food items and clothing especially by companies who can get by with less taxation. Financial means are, however, often considered more flexible to use due to their liquidity, ruling out donations of inappropriate supplies or excess supplies congesting warehouses. (Kovacs: 2011) Financial flows can also be argued as being quicker and more efficient in terms of international cooperation among organisations due to their liquidity.

The measures of funding
Non-Governmental organisations play a big part in humanitarian operations: NGOs were in 2004 responsible for 45 % of all humanitarian assistance. NGOs are also crucial in terms of humanitarian operations funding as 48% to 58% of all humanitarian funds were estimated to pass through NGOs in 2005. NGOs receive their funding from three sources in general: public fundraising, from government agencies and from the United Nations. (Walker & Pepper: 2007; 5)There are also private foundations exercising philanthropy and holding significant amounts of money, which can be directed to humanitarian operations e.g. the Bill Gates foundation. (Thomas &Kopczak: 2005; 1-3) According to figures from 2004, public fundraising played the biggest part in funding, compared to government agencies and the United Nations. (Walker & Pepper: 2007; 5)

Non-governmental funding can be considered consisting of both long- and short-term funding, while these can be further divided in earmarked and non-earmarked donations. However, following the conventional model, the financial flows have not been considered particularly streamlined or even. According to information from the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) provided by Jahre&Heigh (2008), preparatory measures (or the permanent supply chain) received the least funding during the five-year period from 2002 to 2007, while the reconstruction phases (or the recovery phase) received approximately double that funding during the same period. The most funding was directed to immediate response measures (or the emergency phase), but problem here lied in the distribution of the donations along time. The monetary distribution was uneven to say to the least; donations varied from approximately 60 Million CHF to 360 Million CHF during set periods. Having a pattern like this leaves with very little funding for planning: funds flow in during the time when disasters actually do occur.After bigdisasters, numerous earmarked donations pour in. As humanitarian organisations receive massive donations often during a short period in time, the funding also needs to be spent rather quickly. This often leads to extending the emergency period, as emergency fund spending seldom is distributed quickly enough. Last minute spending on emergency supplies is also expensive. (Jahre&Heigh: 2008: 12-14)

This setting speaks for continuous, more streamlined, funding in humanitarian operations in order to continuously develop operations. Several logistical operations rely on funding: procurement and warehousing, performance monitoring and measuring, IT systems development. The support for maintaining geographically scattered operations also need a constant flow of funding in order to keep developing humanitarian operations towards more efficient management.(vanWassenhove: 2009: 35) 

Challenges in funding
Like described above, a big challenge in humanitarian funding is the uncertainty for funds being available at the point in time when they are actually needed. The picture becomes more complex, when humanitarian organisations send pledges for more funds to cover their operations, and these are postponed. 

Earmarking is another noted challenge in terms of humanitarian supply chain efficiency. Donors are considered always wanting to see their donations go straight to persons needing the relief aid, leaving crucial back-office logistical preparation and training without the means that would actually cut the costs of emergency relief in the first place. (Murray: 2005) Earmarking are also a challenge as donated funds can only be used for measures which they were originally meant for: in the Indian Ocean Tsunami emergency relief operation, the NGO Doctors Without Borders (MSF) requested at one point donors to stop sending donations to that disaster in particular and asked them to consider other, more urgent disasters in their donations. Earmarking might lead to inefficiency in the relief supply chain, if donors have specified expectations on the actual supplies sent. (vanWassenhove: 2009: 36) Earmarking can be considered leading to un-proportional decision-making power in terms of the donor. This can be considered contrary to the initial description on humanitarian logistics in this paper, where the beneficiary’s requirements were to be met. (Thomas&Mizushima: 2005) It could, however, be considered for a humanitarian organisation moving away from their voluntary manner if people would be made unable to donate to causes of their own choice. 

An underlying challenge in funding humanitarian operations lies in the unfair promotion in funding. Media, politics and relief aid funding often go hand in hand. Several humanitarian crises can fall victim of favouritism if the donors’ political interests do not coincide with their humanitarian considerations. Donations might be un-proportional regarding the scope of the disaster only due to different media and news approaches. (vonWassenhove: 2009: 36) According to a Brookings Institution comparison between the Haiti Earthquake in 2010 and the Pakistani floods in 2009, the Haiti disaster pledges were reached to a bigger percentage than the Pakistani disaster pledges. The Institution found that this was due to that donors are affected by issues such as the type of disaster, the geographical, religious and political distance to the area and cultural similarity, when donating to different causes. (Ferris: 2010) 

What should be done
One of the important issues to develop in terms of funding humanitarian operations is the long-span streamlining of financial flows.Jahre and Heigh(2008) refer to that whether funds are collected from the public, governments or organisations, funding needs to be of more long-term and un-specified nature in the future, taking different risks and costs more profoundly into consideration.Like earlier mentioned, one reason to inefficiency in funding humanitarian operations can be considered lying in the highly voluntary means of funding as well as the fact mentioned that media attention on disasters do trigger flows of donations much more than during periods without major disasters. (Jahre&Heigh: 2008: 1-2, 7-8) 

Another important issue to develop is the mere transparency and complexity within humanitarian operations and their funding. Issues such as the lack of transparency in transaction costs and the budgetary structure at different organisations, the complexity between organisational governance andthe large scale of different humanitarian organisationscause inefficiency in the overall performance. (Walker&Pepper: 2007: 8;Jahre&Heigh: 2008: 7-8)

The following chapters present the divisive framework on how to look at humanitarian operations funding, i.e. that a change is measures of funding is needed, as well as a structural change in funding. This division is built on suggestions found in academic literature, without taking a further stance on whether these measures are already taken or not and if so to what extent. These categories are not necessary mutually exclusive, but only used to more clearly describe different measures. 
A change in measures of funding
Joint funding
The humanitarian community has introduced joint funding rather recently, after 2005. The Central Emergency Revolving Fund (CERF) is the oldest, founded already in 1991 by the United Nations; The Common Humanitarian Fund (CHF) was founded in 2006, also by the UN, to cover the inequality gapsin operations funding, to reassure that funding targets are met. The United Nations Emergency Response Funds (ERF) grants smaller funding to national humanitarian operations. 	The core issue with joint funding is to be able to respond to emergencies quicker and an even allocation of resources, i.e. that all emergencies are responded to according to and in proportion with the identified need. By 2007, however, only a rather small portion of humanitarian aid in total was funded through the CERF. (Walker & Pepper: 2007: 11-13) Inter-organisational funds serve indisputably an important purpose and are an important means to funding, but joint funding cannot alone provide the funds needed to all humanitarian operations.

More clear-cut thinking
Jahre&Heigh(2008) argue that the way to streamline humanitarian funding is to focus on un-earmarked and long-term funding.Here the differences in funding that exist between the three different humanitarian operation phases and supply chains must be evened out, while permanent funding also needs to increase.  Here one way on streamlining funding can be the measure of promoting the different phases in humanitarian operations more clearly and structure funding according to what is needed in which phase. (Jahre&Heigh: 2008: 12-16)
A structural change in funding
Managing donors
Donor management can be another way forward in rethinking funding. One issue for gaining more stable streams of funding is to enlarge the donor pool and for organisations and NGOs to prove more clearly the neutrality from the current political agenda. (Jahre&Heigh, 2008: 1-2) Changing donor behaviour also needs to engagethe organisation: in order to gain a larger pool of donors, organisational visibility plays and important part. (vonWassenhove: 2009: 58) Overall performance also plays an important part in terms of funding: you need to build rapport with your donors in order for them to have trust in you. In case of organisations failing on some of their service tasks and they fear that donors loose their trust on the organisation, it is more than crucial that the organisation in questions can learn from this incident. (Ross&Segal: 2002: 5-7, 131-132).

Organisational competition
The issue of funding can also be approached from the organisational point of view. Ross & Segal point out in Breakthrough thinking for Nonprofit Organizationthat NGOs today face a tight competition of funds as the number non-profit organisations has increased and due to the fact that not only NGOs are present in the humanitarian operations sector today; also public and company players are part of the humanitarian community. This, however, can be seen as increasing the efficiency in humanitarian operations - the only purpose is only to deliver aid as efficiently as possible. (Ross & Segal: 2002: 4)A harder focus for humanitarian organisations on being more results-oriented, establishing monetary key performance indicators could in itself help use the funding provided for humanitarian organisations in a more efficient manner. 
Cooperation
In academic literature, there is a support for more cooperation between organisations as well as a more integrated model in linking humanitarian operations closer to commercial logistics operations in order to work more efficiently towards a common goal. This perception is lead from the thought of humanitarian supply chain operations needing the similar way of managing resources as conventional supply chains. vanWassenhove explains that the lack of understanding supply chain operations has led to e.gthe lack of efficient budgetary planning.Cooperation can also mean cooperation between humanitarian organisations and that way pool the resources more efficiently, to avoid overlapping measures of funding operations. (van Wassenhove: 2006: 110-111) Another way is forward is to take development aid (here: the preparatory phase or the permanent supply chain) into account in the areas that occasionally receive emergency aid and plan both emergency and development aid in a more purposeful way. (Jahre, Heigh, 2008: 12-16)
Strategic thinking
Ross & Segal argue that in order to reach their goals, organisations and NGOs, like companies should engage in strategic thinking and start from their initial core capabilities and their own incentives. The underlining though here is that organisations, however, do differ in terms of capabilities. When raising funds for a humanitarian operation, the individual is most often the aim of the target. However, depending on organisational strengths and cultural connections different means of how to go about might apply, e.g. some organizations can target people by personal letters, while others have the capacity to cooperatewith international airliners and are able to collect coins on international flights from passengers heading home not in need of foreign coins anymore. Organisations should, however, keep in mind that other organisations could easily copy successful ideas and target their share of the market.  (Ross & Segal: 2002: 7) This thought goes back to the fact that organisations do compete for the same funds.

Ross & Segal mention that potential organisational growth depends very much on the organization in question. The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies are here considered having a rather stable development curve when it comes to memberships and fundraising, meaning that in their case these measures do not need to be rethought about too often. Smaller NGOs might face tougher challenges to gain and maintain members and a certain way of operating. (Ross&Segal: 2002: 7)
Analysis & Discussion
The Fritz Institute calls the humanitarian and disaster relief a growing market-area. (Thomas & Kopczak: 2005: 3) This also implies to that the importance of efficiently funding and financing humanitarian operations will continue to grow. One way to further analyse what needs to be done in terms of funding and financing relief operations is to start from the division provided here: to focus on new ways and approaches of funding, but also simultaneously to think of ways of how to improve the entire system which now holds several actors. Outlining the actual monetary flows in humanitarian operations between different actors also proved more complex than first expected, due to the fact that the humanitarian industry consists of so many different actors: governments, international organisations, non-governmental organisations, public donors, and intergovernmental organisations like the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. (Thomas & Kopczak: 2005: 4) Some of the measures presented here for better streamlining the funding of humanitarian operations will not fit all actors. Considering the scope of this paper, the basis for outlining such extensive research questions was rather ambitious, but the findings also indicate that a more extensive study should be made in the area, especially focusing on certain problem areas, such asthe optimizing monetary flows in humanitarian operations or building the funding patterns forcertain organisations. Findings in this paper can well work as an outline for my final thesis.

The main findings in this paper guide towards the questions that now should be focused on: Which measures should separate organisations work on in order for them to find their most efficient way of using and providing funding into humanitarian operations? How can we measure cooperation between organisations as accurately as possible in monetary terms? Future studies can also be conducted on defining the actual financial flows and more accurately determine how these can be monitored. The fact that cooperation between different humanitarian organisations is growing,imply to that more joint measures on financial controlling and efficiency could and should be taken in the future. 

