What Affects a Consumer's Choice of Grocery Retail Store?
Comparing Stockmann Herkku and LIDL


1. Introduction

1.1. Research Question
This study builds upon the theory of customer value propositions. In everyday shopping the consumer experiences the following values: economic value, functional value, emotional and symbolic values (Rintamäki et al. 2007 in Väkelä 2010). The research field is related to behavioral science and can show how the customer experiences value of his or her purchasing decisions. It is essential for any company searching for competitive advantages in the long run to understand how the customer perceives value. The topic is interrelated with other marketing research areas; Rintamäki et al. (2007) study competitive customer value propositions, whereas Fournier (1998) views the consumer and retailer within a relationship theory framework focused on brands. Furthermore, Messinger and Narasimhan (1997) study retail shopping from a perspective of behavioral science centralized around the actual shopping situation inside the store.

People often choose one store where they favor to do their grocery shopping. Many of us probably recognize ourselves having a certain routine to our grocery shopping: the same store, the same time, the same products and so on. For the case of the retailer it is well worth knowing the factors that influence the consumer when choosing a grocery store. Most previous studies in the field have been theory driven, assuming certain research perspectives. However, I believe that there is not one single theory that can adequately explain customer value perception in retail shopping. There is very little research combining different marketing theories on this topic, this study is focused on studying the retail shopping experience with the possibility of adopting several theoretical frameworks. The question is - can we take a small step towards describing the customer perceived value in grocery retail shopping in a more complete setting?

This study will use qualitative methods documenting how one respondent experiences two very different retail store alternatives presented to him. The two alternatives can in some way be considered as extremes: Stockmann Herkku, representing a “high-end” choice; and LIDL, representing a cost-conscious alternative. The underlying fictional scenario for the study is: if the respondent would move to a new neighborhood where Stockmann and LIDL are located equally close to home, based on which retail store specific aspects would the respondent evaluate and choose a preferred retail store for his or her regular grocery shopping? 

1.2. Aim of the Study
The aim of this study is to describe the specific factors that a consumer considers when doing local grocery shopping. This study focuses on two different case studies that can be considered as extremes: Stockmann Herkku and LIDL. The aim of this study is not to see which grocery retailer the consumer respondent actually chooses, but rather to explore how the consumer experiences the factors involved when faced with two extreme cases. The study will provide rich data on how the respondent experiences the stores. The results can be used by retail professionals as support for further studying strategic positioning questions. 

1.3. Structure of the Study
This study is structured in the following way: after the Introduction part I present theory on Customer Value Propositions and Retail Shopping. In chapter three I present the Method used for the study, this chapter includes the choice of Sampling and Observations. In chapter four I present my Analysis, which is followed by a Discussion part in chapter five. Finally, in chapter six I summarize the main findings of the study in the Conclusions chapter.

2. Customer Value Propositions and Retail Shopping

The theory for the study builds upon customer value propositions. In everyday shopping the consumer experiences the following values: economic value, functional value, emotional and symbolic values (Rintamäki et al. 2007 in Väkelä 2010).

In addition to this, there are also other factors presented in research literature that can affect the consumer’s choice of grocery shopping. Brands have a clear role, especially when it comes to the products available at the retail store (Fournier 1998). We should note that the brand factor can also be represented in the emotional and symbolic value. 

Research shows that especially grocery shopping is a function of optimizing shopping time and price; that is, the consumer wishes to spend as little time shopping as possible (Messinger and Narasimhan 1997). Russell and Vincent-Wayne (1999) found that grocery shopping is the most stressful shopping form. Regarding these theories I would expect to make observations related to stress and hurry of the subject in the field, and this in turn will affect the experience the subject has of the retail store. 

3. Method

3.1. Sampling
According to Patton (2002), sampling is to design the unit or units of analysis. Sampling strategy and sample size depend on decisions about the appropriate unit of analysis to study. 
There is a wide range of sampling strategies available to the researcher. For this study I have chosen the use of one respondent. Because of limited resources, this is done through convenience sampling combined with criterion sampling. The respondent has to fulfill some certain criteria in order to be purposeful for this study (Patton 2002). It should be noted that the income level of the consumer / respondent will affect the choice of preferred grocery retailer to a large extent. Therefore, the chosen respondent has a medium high income, so that he would have the possibility to choose either one of the stores. Naturally, it could be expected that he would prefer Stockmann Herkku because of income level. However, this is not completely relevant for this particular study; by experiencing the two extreme cases, this study aims to find out what are the factors that this particular consumer appreciates and dislikes in the two retail stores in order to define the factors involved. My main subject is Daniel, who is my husband.
For the case of shopping type I chose groceries for my sample, because grocery shopping is done regularly and therefore concerned with loyalty. It has been shown that food shopping involves feelings and is also related to the identity of the consumer (Väkelä 2010). 

The study builds upon the case of testing two extreme cases of retail stores - upscale vs. affordable; the sample chosen is Stockmann Herkku and LIDL. They are actually located close to each other in Helsinki center and the consumer could in fact be faced with choosing one of these stores for regular grocery shopping. I make the limitation and assumption that a consumer will choose one single retail store where he or she will favor to do regular grocery shopping as a loyal customer.
The time of the shopping event and observation has been chosen to realistically represent a typical situation when most people do their grocery shopping (Patton 2002). Finally, I have chosen to do the interview the day after the shopping event. By doing so, I believe the event will be fresh in mind for the respondent. On the other hand, if the interview would have taken place immediately after the event, the results might be biased due to the stress from shopping, tiredness or other enhanced feelings of the moment.
3.2. Observations
My observation approach for studying the shopping events of the respondent can be described as naturalistic. Naturalism or naturalistic observation is commonly used by social scientists and refers to observing the subjects in a natural environment (Belk et al. 1988). I used three different sources for gathering data: photos, field observations, and an interview.

For doing the fieldwork I had a few choices regarding the technique to use. Firstly, should I myself be a participant or should this be a non-participant observation Silverman (2006). Belk et al. (1988) state that “typically, a naturalistic researcher travels along the continuum from passive to participant observation”. I realize that it would be very difficult to maintain a non-participant role and passively observe my subject in this case. If we would not know each other, it might be a possibility to do observation from aside; however, I am used to shopping together with Daniel and I believe the best option is participant observation. Therefore, I chose the most natural setting that can be made: me and Daniel are shopping together just as we normally would do, except that I am making field notes and documenting at the same time. By being a participant, the observer can pick up on different things, for example, on the mood and frustration of a subject.

3.2.1. Photos
During our visit to the two grocery stores I was documenting Daniel’s shopping by taking photos with my phone camera. I took a total of 75 photos during the shopping in both stores. Belk et al. (1988) state that “it is standard practice to record as much detail as possible, usually well beyond what the inquirer at the time thinks will be necessary”. Out of the 75 photos I chose 18 that I found particularly interesting for this study; 9 were taken in Stockmann Herkku and 9 in LIDL. These photos can be found in Appendix 1. The photo data has been categorized in two sets according to the shopping site, each exhibit is numbered in the appendix.

3.2.2. Field Notes
During the shopping I took field notes; the day after the field research I went through the notes and added a few things that came to my mind. In addition to the observational field notes, which I made on the subject and the surroundings, I also documented a self-reflection part. All of these texts can be found in Appendix 2. Self-reflection is important in order to openly show the reader how the research was conducted and also the possible mistakes; this adds to the reliability of the research. The researcher’s journals contain valuable information that can add to the observations and results of the study (Belk et al. 1988).

In my field notes I have preliminary categorized my data according to the observations in chronological order (see Appendix 2). As this study contains a quite small amount of data, I consider that no further categorization was needed. In chapter 4 of this report the observations will be coded according to emerging patterns of the research focus. 

3.2.3. Interviews
The interview with my subject, Daniel, was carried out on Monday, Feb 14th 2011. That was two days after the shopping took place in the field. The interview was carried out at our home and we did not have any significant time limit. Patton (2002) reports that using an open-ended interview can provide the most detailed and deep understanding of subjective matters. However, for an inexperienced interviewer using this technique it is risky since it requires the most skill in the interviewer. Therefore, I believe it was motivated to use an interview guide to establish the topics of interest that were to be covered during the interview. The interview guide that was prepared can be found in Appendix 3. The interview guide was structured in different topics according to the theoretical framework on customer value propositions: price, quality, and emotions. Also, the focus on time and cost optimization theory lead to a topic on time. An important part was also to determine the feelings involved with shopping, there is a separate set of questions focused on the emotions of the interviewee, for example, “what feelings arouse in the stores?”.

In addition to using the interview guide, I decided to use a projection technique at the end of the interview. A projection technique can refer to using photos or other documents in order to getting the interviewee to recall things better (Patton 2002). Since I had the photos from the field when we were shopping, I decided that showing them to Daniel might make him remember some details and maybe reflect on things in a different way, once he has some distance to the event.

4. Analysis

4.1. Analysis of Field Notes and Photos
An early concept for further investigation was to divide the factors that affect the consumer the most into a few categories with subcategories. 

For reaching the abstraction of which concepts to use, a number of processes were used: comparison, dimensionalization, integration, iteration, and refutation (Spiggle 1994). Because this study is faced with two competing alternatives or samples, Stockmann Herkku and LIDL, it is natural to use comparison as an important tool for analysis. Comparison is done throughout the research and shows similarities and differences (Spiggle 1994). The dimensional ranges are presented below in Table 5 and the respective observations in Table 6. 
[Table]
[Table]
I used the photos recorded in the field mainly as a tool for recollecting the events, both for me and the interviewee during the interview. The exhibits in Appendix 1 will hopefully help the reader to relate with the experiment. I will briefly point out the most interesting observations within the photos. In Exhibit 1 we see the entrance to Stockmann; Daniel points out in the interview that Stockmann was really crowded. However, by looking at the photos from Stockmann and LIDL (Exhibit 10.), it seems that there were equally much people in the shopping space of both stores. Stockmanns store is nevertheless very differently designed, especially in the vegetables area customers can move in all directions between shelves, whereas in LIDL the corridors are straight and customers cannot move in any direction. The Stockmann design seems more attractive to the eye probably, but LIDL’s design is clearly more practical during rush hours.

In Exhibit 8 we see Daniel yawning at the cashier. Additional data in the interview and field notes support that the shopping experience in Stockmann Herkku was not in any way exciting and was focused on getting the items on the shopping list.

4.2. Analysis of the Interview
In the previous chapter I have described my process of analyzing field notes and photos. The analysis of the interview follows the same concepts and methods described there. 

According to theory (Fournier 1998) the brand will matter when shopping. In the interview material I also found suggestions for this being true: “I would expect to find all things in Stockmann. It’s a large department store that has everything and has a good name for it”. It seems here that Daniel was expecting Stockmann to have everything, but since Stockmann did not, he experienced a disappointment. This could be compared with service marketing theory on how a service gap will have negative effects (Grönroos 2007). A further quote from the interviewee states that it matters that he didn’t find what he expected: “Well I guess, it’s annoying if you don’t find what you came for”. 

On the other hand of this issue there were interesting observations on how Daniel found items that were not on his shopping list in LIDL. The field observations state that the shopping in LIDL was more relaxed and that the shoppers talked more. In LIDL there were several items bought that were not on the original shopping list, I call this impulse buying in my construct in Table 5. On the question whether Daniel was happy with the shopping experience at LIDL, his answer was: “Yes, very! We got a lot of useful stuff that we need. I really planned to get those Omega 3, but I just forgot or don’t have time to go looking”. Daniel is clearly happy with the outcome of the shopping at LIDL and immediately states that all the necessary purchases were done and even some extra. This statement is very interesting and leads to the observation that time and productivity of the shopping is a very important factor.

Concerning the efficiency of shopping I have also noted during the field research that stress influenced the behavior of Daniel as he was shopping. Later in the interview he also brings it up: “Stockmann was really stressful! There were so much people and you bumped into people all the time. LIDL felt much more comfortable in that way”. Later when talking about the brand image of LIDL, he also comments: “LIDL is all about cheap; they have stuff in huge piles and neon signs with great offers. I can’t say that I like that, but still I felt much better in LIDL because there was much less stress”. In other words, for Daniel minimizing stress is more important than the brand image of the store. 

In our setting we are interested in which store Daniel would choose in case he was moving into the area were Stockmann Herkku and LIDL are located, to this question he answered: “I would choose LIDL for basic need shopping. It’s quicker, easier and less stressful. But for getting better products, maybe for some weekends and dinners I would go to Stockmann”.  

Just as in the case of field work and doing field notes it is important for the researcher to analyze the process in a critical fashion. The reflections of the researcher can provide additional insight for the reader. During the interview I was trying to observe the behavior of Daniel as well as critically analyzing my own behavior and my interviewing technique. The interview was in general pretty smooth and easy to do because Daniel was really eager to help out. However, this might not have been the case with someone unknown. Therefore, I do realize that there were some things lacking in my interview guide and technique. Some of my original questions were designed in a dichotomous way; that is, the answer is often yes or no. Fortunately, the respondent in this case still elaborated on the answers. I have developed an improved interview guide to point out these possible improvements that could have resulted in a deeper and more enlightening interview. 

4.3. Integrated construct
For reaching constructs that can evolve into theory, the researcher uses an approach of integration. This refers to integrating constructs and categories that have been found (Strauss and Corbin 1990, in Spiggle 1994). For this study the integration will look at integrating the observations and the interview results. In table 7 I present an integrated construct that divides the factors involved in grocery shopping into two categories: 1) consumer oriented factors, and 2) product and store oriented factors. 
[Table]
My analysis of field notes, photos, and an interview shows that there are many factors involved when shopping groceries. I have divided the factors in two general categories: 1) consumer oriented factors (time optimization, stress, convenience); and 2) product and store oriented factors (price, quality, brand, service). 

Rintamäki et al. (2007) present customer value propositions as a way for determining what matters in grocery shopping. These value propositions are: economic value, functional value, emotional, and symbolic value. 

My data and analysis found some support that all of these things matter for the respondent Daniel when choosing a grocery store; however, none of them were very important. He did not compare prices, and thought prices for groceries do not vary much. He had tested most of the products after the shopping and did not see any major difference between product brands. He might favor domestic products slightly because of ideals but not because of quality. The brand factor’s impact is difficult to determine in this study; Daniel was clearly aware that LIDL has a “low-cost” brand image and he also expected that Stockmann would carry the products he is looking for because it has a good image. In this case the marketing theory shows that Daniel was pleasantly surprised with Stockmann, but disappointed with Stockmann because of high expectations. However, he doesn’t bring up this as a major factor when asked in the interview. For the case of grocery shopping, the interaction with service personnel was minimal and therefore it did not play any role for the subject of this study. I acknowledge that in this case the behavior might be very different for another individual.

For the subject of my study, Daniel, it was established in several data sources that the shopping experience in LIDL was much more pleasant. In LIDL the shopping was also experienced as much more successful because all items were found and also something that was not planned, this was a major factor for Daniel. Daniel also experienced the stress and crowds in Stockmann very negatively. Dividing the factors that influence grocery store choice in two categories clearly shows that for Daniel the most important are the consumer oriented factors; that is, the things that he experiences in practice when shopping. Although I call them consumer oriented, it does not mean that the retailer cannot affect them. For example, when comparing Stockmann and LIDL, I found that the design of the store and shelves can have an effect on how consumers move, and therefore, also how they experience crowds and the following stress factor. It might be that it is not the intention of Stockmann to be a store that is optimally designed for everyday grocery shopping. In the interview Daniel states that he would do his everyday shopping in LIDL, but chooses to buy better fresh quality products at Stockmann when cooking for a dinner party. Although this study does not consider the specific marketing, operational and brand strategies of the cases Stockmann and LIDL, I believe the results are interesting for showing how a consumer behaves and rationalizes when choosing retail store for grocery shopping.

6. Conclusions


