Goals 


1. Introduction
1.1 Research topic
      Having started in humble beginnings, project management has become a
management discipline, which in today's professional world is in many ways of central
significance. According to a statistic published by the Project Management Institute in
2001, roughly one fourth of the world GNP is produced in project-like ventures
(Schwalbe 2006:2). According to another statistic projects in SME's alone make up
approximately one fifth of the European Union's GDP (Turner, Ledwith & Kelly
2009:744).

      Owing to its origin as a practitioner-driven management discipline (Citation:
multiple), the foundations of project management are not built of theories, but are in
stead largely based on the codification of experienced best practices (Citation: Lenfle &
Koch). Nevertheless, during the last three decades, project management has received a
lot of attention from academia as well as from management gurus. This development
has to be seen as positive as well as deserved. Simultaneously, the practical discipline
has seen some consolidation in the sense that many major practical actors have gone on
to create frameworks, which can be described as standards, to homogenize the
practicing of project management.

      However, the academic research into project management seems to largely
disregard investigating the one element in projects, which is no less than the very reason
for the projects' existence: the setting of project goals.

      A project's goal is of an immense significance to any project - not only does the
goal rationalize the very existence of the project ­ there are numerous studies, which
largely attribute a project's success or failure to the project goals. To name a few,
Nelson, in his study of 10 infamous project failures in IT-projects names "bad goals"
and related reasons as the culprit to project failure in the majority of cases (Nelson
2007:67-76). Similarly there are claims that project goals constitute the foundation of
any project, and that it is of immense importance that these goals are set well (Williams
& Samset 2010:39-43; Frame 1995:21-22). Paradoxically, most comprehensive works
on project management disregard the process of project goal setting almost entirely.
                                                       

          Thus the question remains: how are project goals set?

          The purpose of this paper is thus to attempt to offer project management
researchers and practitioners alike a usable framework for evaluating and understanding
project management goal setting.

          We will thus begin with exploring in detail, what the discipline of project
management and has to offer us on the process of project goal setting. This description
offered by the project management discipline will thereafter be contrasted with some
well-established relevant theories from within the generic management literature
(especially regarding decision making and behavior in organizations). Thereafter the
author aims at creating a synthesis.

1.2 Methodology and limitations
          This paper views project goals as a result of human decision making ­ not as
something which fell from the sky. Thus it also implies, that there is a considerable
freedom in selecting, which goals a project shall meet.

          As such we turn to Simon, who in his widely cited text states, that a decision
process in its simplest form contains three steps, which usually happen in the order of:
1) searching for situations necessitating decision-making; 2) identifying or creating
alternative solutions and 3) choice of the best alternative solution. Simon further notes
that, although decision-making usually encompasses these three steps, every single step
can also contain an entire decision-making process of its own (the formulation of an
alternative solution can be seen as a decision-making process), and that later steps can
create the necessity to "take a step back" and search for new information. (Simon
1977:40­44)

          Using Simon's model as starting point, we divide the goal-setting process in
projects into two stages: collation of alternative goals and choice of which goals to
pursue. Thus we need to study the goal setting process in projects from two different
dimensions:

          The first dimension is the contextual dimension, which largely corresponds to
steps one and two of Simon's model (intelligence and design). The contextual
dimension encompasses the subjective need for a project (objectives for the project) and
the different parties' expectations for the project.

          The second dimension is the decision-making dimension, which corresponds to
Simon's third step (choice). Thus the decision-making dimension concerns itself with
the selection of the project goals among those alternative solutions mapped out in the
contextual dimension.

          Both these dimensions will be summarized based on project management
literature (although project management literature says very little about the decision-
making dimension). Further, theories about decision-making in general will be
summarized based on literature on decision-making and organizational behavior in
general.

          Thus the paper's main content could be described as an attempt at
interdisciplinary synthesis between the fields and literatures of project management and
those of organizational behavior. Due to the interdisciplinary nature of the paper some
strategic decisions have to be made.

          Firstly, the paper aims to cover the topic on a level, which is as abstract and non-
specific as possible. Secondly, to be able to cover 'the state of project management
thought', the project management literature will be used as widely as possible. Thus this
paper will not limit itself to scientific papers, but will also use practitioners' guides as
reference.

          Owing to a it's significance as basis of project management certification "The
Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) Guide" is the discipline's de-facto
­standard and can thus not be disregarded.

1.3 Definitions
          As the project management discipline is not fully consistent in its use of
terminology and as this paper takes an interdisciplinary approach, some terms used will
be defined and explained.

          Further, as this paper aims to be as non-specific as possible, the author intends to
make no difference between different types of organizations. All organizations, whether
private companies, public institutions or of some other type, will be referred to as
organizations existing in an environment.

          Likewise, this paper does not differentiate between internal projects (in which the
project owner and the project team belong to the same legal unit), external projects (in
which the owner belongs to one unit and the team to another) or network projects (in
which the owner(s) and team(s) may belong to several units).

          There is no consensus on the exact definition of a project. Within this paper, a
project is defined as "A unique venture having specific goals, which by nature is
temporary and utilizes different types of resources with the aim to produce a result. A
project creates an own organization within its parent organization(s)."

          The term project management is seen as encompassing both elements project
leadership and project administration. The project organization is used to describe the
form of organization within projects and in contrast to the process organization. The
project organization shall not be mixed up with the term projectile organization, which
in turn refers to a parent organization organized around projects.

          In contrast with the project, the venture striving for unique results, and the project
organization, the sub organization created to suit the project, the organization's process
is defined as the organization's repeating tasks and the process organization (without
regard to what specialization criteria is used as orientation) as the organization created
to support those.

          The project owner is that part of the process organization, which functions as
client to the project. The project owner is interpreted as a group of individuals and thus
as an organization.

          Project goals and goals for projects will be categorized as follows. There is a clear
differentiation between a project's goals ­ the metrics the project shall fulfill and a
project's objectives ­ what is expected of the project. Further it shall be noted that
individuals and groups can have their own expectations for a project.

          Within the realm of this paper, the term party or parties are used to denote groups
of individuals who have a specific interest regarding an issue. Depending on the
situation, a party can either be the entire organization, a subunit of an organization (e.g.
the accounting department) or a group of people holding a common view on the issue.
In some situations an organization may also be a party. Within this paper, the use of
party is used to emphasize the perceived significance of the relevant party's specific
interests. A single-person party is defined as a player.

        As the term 'professional' could be seen as referring to persons having project
management certificates, the paper will coin people who work as project manager's
practitioners.

1.4 Description of contents
        This chapter will describe the structure of the paper.


2. Project goal setting
        Introduction and description of chapter 2.

        In this paper's description of project goal setting we will utilize Simon's
definition of goals (in organizations): "By goals we shall mean value premises that can
serve as inputs to decisions." (Simon 1964:3). In the context of this paper, the
definition implies that any definition or specification, which is intended to steer
individual decision making and an individual's subsequent action towards a wished-for
end-result constitutes a goal.

2.1 The importance of the contextual dimension
        The importance of the early stages in projects has been well known for some time
(Miller & Hobbs 2005:43). Nevertheless, the discipline's advance in these early stages
has been significantly slower than it has been concerning the implementation phase
(Williams & Samset 2010:39).

        In the following paragraphs this paper aims to present the project management
literature's view on project goals and their origins. To be able to describe this complex
topic, this paper divides the topic into four subtopics. Firstly we will explore basic
questions such as the amount of goals as well as inter-goal relations. Secondly we will
delve into the effect the properties of goals have for a project. Thirdly we will describe
where goals come from, and how they come into existence. Finally, as neither projects
nor their goals exist in isolation, we will study the project selection process in view of
how it might affect project goals.

2.1.1 One goal? Several goals?
       That projects are oriented towards goals is beyond doubt (Frame 1995:2;
Choudhury 1988:3; Harrison 1981:1). Therefore we would like to be able to assume,
that the literature would be in agreement over such elementary questions as how many
goals projects have or how these goals relate to each other. Sadly this assumption would
be quite erroneous.

       The simplest way to describe a projects goals is to define the project as a venture
aimed to fulfilling specific qualitative goals, in a way that the projects costs do not
exceed a given limit while also finishing the project before a given deadline. This
simple model is called the triple constraint (Berggren 2001:16­17) and can in this paper
be described as a relation between use of time, the use of money and the fulfillment of
the qualitative goals.




       [Figure]

       The triple constraint, similarly as a significant part of the literature, builds on the
hypothesis that projects are started to fulfill specific qualitative goals, and that the
quantitative goals ­ cost and time use ­ are calculated based on what reaching the
qualitative goals can be assumed to necessitate. This model practically implies, that the
qualitative goals are decisive, and that the kvantitative goals are derived from the
qualitative goals. Therefore, the literature often describes the qualitative goals as actual
or proper goals, and calls the kvantitative goals "limitations". Although this view has
it's critics it nevertheless represents the mainstream of the literature and vill thus be
used as basis in this paper. Therefore the focus of this paper will also be on studying the
goal setting process of the qualitative goals (henceforth "goals" will point to qualitative
goals and "limitations" to quantitative goals) and will disregard the limitations.

       Some authors state that a project may only have one goal (Wysocki & McGary
2003:5), whereas others state that projects can have several goals, but must have at least
one goal (Futrell, Shafer & Shafer 2002:226), or further, that projects usually have
several (two to five) main goals and a multitude of detail-level goals (Andersen et al.
2004:42). As the view that project may have more than one goal is espoused by most
writers, this paper will continue based on that assumption.

       That projects may have several goals brings up an important question: how do the
different goals relate to each other? To exemplify the problem we can utilize the
example given by Futrell et al.: that the organization aims to (besides reaching the
project's functional goals) use the project as a vehicle for developing its personnel and
as a reference (Futrell et al. 2002:227). This example is suitable in that it point out that
attainment of one goal can be dependent upon the attainment of another goal (if the
functional goals are not attained, the project won't be usable as reference) and that they
likewise be independent of each other (the personnel can be developed even although
the project would not reach its functional goals).

       Andersen et al. state that project goals should be structured in complete
hierarchies, meaning that higher-level, abstract goals should be divided up into the more
tangible goals, which are necessary to attain to be able to fulfill the higher-level goals
(Andersen et al. 2004:38­48).

       The hierarchical goal structures presented by Andersen et al. can be described as:
     The project's purpose, which necessitates the fulfillment of
       Project's 1st (main) goal is attained, which necessitates the fulfillment of
             Goal a#
             Goal b#
       Project's 2nd (main)goal is attained, which necessitates the fulfillment of
            Goal c#
            and so on 
       

[Figure]


       Furthermore, it needs to be stated, that all projects always concern more than one
party, even when the project is internal ­ the project owner (client) and the project
performers (project team). The relation between parties can be seen as being in
ceaseless conflict: The project owner wants to maximize his goal-attainment, as quickly
and cheaply as possible. The project team's wishes would be practically the opposite.
(Turner 1993:52­54)

       As Simon states, in situations like these one party's limitation may be the other
party's goal (Simon 1964:8). The delimitation between goals and limitations is thus first
and foremost a question of perspective (Simon 1964:20), because the whole can also be
seen as a set of limitations, and if no solution can be found that satisfies all limitations
(or conversely, all goals) then the project will not be begun (Simon 1964:8­9).

       In any case, we are forced to concede that the different parties partaking in a
project will have differing wishes and expectations for the projects. Further we can
extrapolate that as the number of parties partaking in a project increase, the amount of
expectations for the project will probably increase as well.

2.1.2 The significance of project goals
       A project's lifecycle is usually described through partitioning the project in
different phases or stages, based on the idealized chronological procession. The de-facto
­standard, the PBMOK-guide defines these phases as 1) starting the project, 2) planning
and organizing, 3) carrying out the project work and 4) closing the project (PMI
2008:15­22).

       In contrast, Schultz, Slevin and Pinto describe projects as a whole composed of a
strategic phase ­ decision making on project goals and planning on how these shall be
reached ­ and a tactical phase - beskriver projekt som en helhet som har en strategisk
del ­ beslutsfattandet om målsättningar och planeringen om hur de ska uppnås ­ och en
taktisk del ­ implementing the strategy (Schultz et al. 1987:34­35).

       This partitioning proposed by the PMBOK-guide is unsuitable for a study of
project goal setting, as it is obscure regarding how the goal-setting process is divided
between the first two phases. On the other hand, the more coarse division proposed by
Schultz et al. does not suffer this handicap, and will thus constitute the basis for the next
chapters.

          Besides the decisions made regarding the project goals necessarily constituting
the basis of the entire project, they are of critical importance also as they are made at a
very early stage and thus have a long time to influence the project (Williams & Samset
2010:39).

          The discussion of the properties of project goals can be divided into two
categories. On one hand there is a discussion on what kind of goals have a string
influence. On the other hand there is a discussion on what kind of goals led to the
desired results. The discussion could thus be described as a division into separate
discussions on good goals (effective goals) on one hand and right goals (efficient goals)
on the other. (Williams & Samset 2010:43)

          For linguistic convenience, I will describe the dichotomy as being between
"effective goals" and "right goals".

          As the question of which goals are "right" is strongly situation dependent (i.e. the
right goals depend on the purpose of the project), it is impossible to generalize specific
right goals. Thus the question of right goals will be saved for the next chapter. In
contrast, the discussion on effective goals will be attacked right away.

          Goals shall be clear (clarity). This conclusion is cited in a large number of
sources and take different forms. According to some sources, goals must be specific,
measureable and not too complex (Kerzner 2009:296), measureable and monitor able
(Krishna 2006:60­61), well communicated, understood and generally accepted (Hong,
Nahm & Doll 2004:1274­1275) and that teams shall be provided with simple,
unequivocal directions (McComb & Green 1999:11). Furthermore Turner and Cochrane
use the clarity of goals (whether they are clear or not) as one of two criteria to classify
project risk categories (Turner & Cochrane 1993:93­95).

        In an empirical study on what competencies project managers need in different
project stages Skulmoski and Hartman note that the project's strategic phase
necessitate above all communication competencies and the ability to articulate complex
situations in an understandable manner (Skulmoski & Hartman 2010:64­66).

        Again, these definitions point to a dichotomy, in which some authors emphasize
the importance of communication (which I will call the communication-school) to reach
clarity, whereas others see clarity as something, which is primarily reached through
goals being quantifiable and measureable (which I will call the quantification-school).

        The quantification-school is further supported by the S.M.A.R.T ­method,
which states that goals must be specific, measureable, attainable, relevant and tangible
(Kerzner 2009: 296).

        In contrast to the quantification-school, some authors even point to the existence
of hidden goals (Frame 1995:49; Turner 1993:55­56; Nash, Plugge & Eurelings 2000:1;
Kotsalo-Mustonen 1996:49­50). Turner further notes about hidden goals, that they can
either support or counteract the overt goals, and also gives some examples of hidden
goals, e.g. that a project should lead to enabling layoffs (Turner 1993:55). Although
Frame and Nash neither state how or why goals should become or be kept hidden,
Saravirta offers one possible explanation (using Nonaka's and Takeuchi's terminology),
that goals which can be articulated are either explicit (if they have been articulated) or
implicit (if they have not yet been articulated), whereas goals which can not be
articulated stay tacit (hidden)(Saravirta 2001:54­55). Kotsalo-Mustonen further states
that organizations as well as players can have tacit goals, and that in organizations these
tacit goals usually relate to organizational tradition and culture, whereas players' tacit
goal usually exist to serve the individual's personal valuations and ambitions (Kotsalo-
Mustonen 1996:49­50).

        In summary, there seems to be two different ways to look at how to make goals
effective. The difference can be described as the striving for creating and publicizing
quantifiable goals, which need not be actively communicated on one hand, while on the
other hand emphasis is placed on more qualitative goals and the project manager's
capacity and willingness to communicate these to the team. As hidden goals can neither
be quantified, nor communicated, neither school can explain the existence of these.

2.2 The setting of right goals
       Introduction

       Goals are important. Different goals lead to different projects (Abdel-Hamid,
Sengupta & Swett 1999:546­547). Choosing the right goals is of immense importance
(Williams & Samset 2010:38­39).

       Right goals are not something general. The "rightness" of goals depend how well
the project goals match the expectations of central actors.

2.2.1 Who have expectations of a project
       Starting with central parties (owner and team), going on to project manager
(Krishna 2006:60, PMI 2008:73; Andersen et al. 2004:48­51; Turner 1993:427; PMI
2008:73­77)

       Continuing to stakeholders ... (Turner 1993:54­55; PMI 2008:23­26; Turner
1993:54; Englund 2006:353­355; Sahlin-Andersson 1986:156­158; Cleland 1994:140­
142)

       Going to players (Frame 1995:48­49; Kirby 1996:211).

       Strategy as "player" in goals (Artto et al 2006:17; PMI 2008:10­11; Turner
1993:18, 37­43; Cleland 1994:81­82; Schwalbe 2006:32­33; Wysocki & McGary
2003:357­358; Artto & Wikström 2005:349­350; Artto et al. 2006:373).

       PSO-view (Andersen et al. 2004:1­7, 37­48; Turner 1993:52­56, 63­66)

       Top management (PMI 2008:24,73) and sponsors (Artto et. al 2006:42; Kerzner
2009:19; Kerzner 2009:393; Miller & Hobbs 2005:45; Meredith & Mantel 2010:117).

       Link to next.

2.2.2 Project selection
       Introductory paragraph (relevancy).

       Economic feasibility (Schwalbe 2006:37­43) and strategic fit (Artto et al.
2006:371­372) are some simple metrics. Further complex models of analysis can be
utilized (Cleland 1994:86­88; Schwalbe 2006:43­45), even a balanced scorecard can be
used (Schwalbe 2006:45). There are weaknesses: interrelations can not be estimated and
estimates are made based on highly tenuous information.

     Sum of projects: strategic fit (Cleland 1994:81­85). Methods for increasing inter-
organization and synergies (PMI 2008:9­10).

     Summary of project selection's effect on project goals: Hurdle-clearing behavior
(Williams & Samset 2010:43), effects of other projects on new project and competition
for limited resources (Graham & Englund 1997:38­39).

2.3 Summary of project goal setting
     Introduction to recap of (2.1 ­ 2.2)

     Recap of 2.1. Quite detailed.

     Recap of 2.2. Quite detailed.

     Summary of recaps.

     Shining the light on the weak areas in project management literature.

     Link to next.


3. Information-processing and decision-making
     Introduction, explanation of structure

3.1 Models and perspectives on decision-making
3.1.1 Simon's model of decision making
     Detailed re-examination of Simon's model. (Simon 1977:40­44)

3.1.2 Different perspectives on decision-making
     What are decision-making perspectives, what is their relevance?

     Quote some comparative studies (=> Björkman, => Allison
     The rational choice -perspective
     Description of rational choice ­perspective. (Björkman, others...).
     The justification-perspective
     Description of justification ­perspective. (Björkman, others...).
                                                                          
                        The political perspective
                        Description of political perspective (Cyert & March 1963; March 1981; Pfeffer
1981).
                        The rule-based perspective
                        Description of rule-based perspective (March 1981; Björkman 1987:10­12).
                        Summary of perspectives
                        Summary of perspectives with emphasis on information-processing.

[Table]

3.2 The decision-making dimension
                        Recap and summary, who influence project goals

                        Recap and summary, how are decisions on project goals made? We don't know.
                                           




     [Figure]




      [Figure]

      Expert judgment??? (PMI 2008:73­77).

      The project literature does not take stance on decision-making perspectives.

      Two different interpretations: either projects are always decided on objectively
(rational choice) or this is a major lapse.

      Next step: to be able to prove a lapse, I need to disprove the first interpretation.
Link to next.

3.3 The project goal setting process. Summary and hypothesis.
      Rationalization of situation. Definition of hypothesis 1:
   If political decision-making exists, this implies that there is more than one party to
   the process, and that the parties are undecided on either what decision should be
   made or how it should be made.
      Rationalization and hypothesis 2:
   If other perspectives exist in projects, there is no reason to believe they would not
   impart on goal setting.

4. Indices of decision-making ­perspectives in project
   management literature
      Introduction

      Weight on political perspective (or focus solely on political perspective)
     

4.1 Rule-based decision-making
     Introduction

     Circumstantial evidence of rules in information-processing (Schwalbe 2006:73­
77; Meredith & Mantel 2010:42­58, 70; Frame 2002:205­206).

     Normative nature of practitioners' books, existence of a de-facto ­standard and
certification system (Hodgson 2002:807; Lenfle & Koch 2010:43).

     Academic interest in heuristic research (success/failure factors), tendency to use
case studies and anecdotal evidence.

4.2 Justification-based decision-making
     Introduction

     Hurdle-clearing behavior (Williams & Samoset 2010; Gilbreath 1986:35­36) and
deliberate misestimating (Gilbreath 1986:156).

4.3 Political decision-making
     Introduction: Political behavior (Link to OB). Structure:

     Is political behavior related to political-based decision-making?

     Explanation of the concept of power.

     Description of purpose.

4.3.1 What is political behavior
     Building a definition (Pfeffer 1981; Rollinson 2008:405).

     Implications: Power and politics are related (Rollinson 2008:405). Instability
breeds politics (Rollinson 2008:405; Pinto 1996; Englund 2006:356). Politics creates
conflict but also helps solve disputes (Rollinson 2008:405).

     Political decision-making and political behavior are related.

     Cartwright says political behavior is human (Cartwright 2002:142) and politics
can neither be deemed intrinsically negative or positive (Cavanagh, Moberg &
Velasquez 1981:369­371).

     Power constitutes a central part in understanding organizations (Cavanagh et al.
1981:363). Politics can not be understood without power: Link to next.
                                         
4.3.2 Power in organizations
      Power is influence (French & Raven 1959:61­71).

      Two views: All use of power is political (Martin & Sims 1956:25­28), only
unsanctioned use of power is political (Mayes & Allen 1977:674­677).

4.3.3 Politik i projekt
      Different views:

      Project management in inextricably linked to politics, due to several factors (Pinto
2000:85­86)

      Politics is central to project management, and the fact that managers are ignorant
of this, only makes it worse (Pinto & Kharbanda 1995:41).

      Project managers need political competence to hold their own against all other
parties, who are politically competent, and do not shy away from using their power
(Pinto 1997:1­2)

      Pinto's reasoning is believable, as it links to many of projects' special features
(instability etc.)

      Projects are rife with rampant politics. Because teams are temporary
organizations, the risk of politic dispute within teams is accentuated. A Project manager
must interest himself of every player and try to ascertain every player's expectations for
the project, whether they are explicit or hidden. (Frame 2002:149­160)

      Project managers and politicians are very alike, they don't have the power, but
they influence (Frame 1995:47).

      Empirical studies show, that politics in projects happen (Ewusi-Mensah &
Przasnyski 1991:82).

      Even sponsors need to be politically adept (Kloppenborg, Tesch, Manolis &
Heitkamp 2006:17).

      Politics in projects is unavoidable, and not wanting to take part bodes trouble.
(PMI 2008:420).

4.3.4 Politics in projects ­ good or bad
      Introduction

      Politics is perceived as negative (Pinto 2000:85; Englund 2006:451) but possibly
it can not be avoided. But what stance should project managers take?

      You can see it as unavoidable (Pinto 2000:85,86), and Project managers should
thus learn to play the game (Pinto 2000:86; Pinto & Kharbanda 1995:42).

      Or you can see politics as an integral (and neutral) aspect of project management,
and project managers should see political ability just as any other relative skill (Frame
2002:156­157; Englund 2006:349).

      My opinion is irrelevant

4.4 Summary of decision-making perspectives in project management
      Summary of findings.

      Summary: Politics exist.

      And given the nature of projects it should surprise no-one.

      To reflect on the hypotheses:

      Hypothesis 1:
   If political decision-making exists, this implies that there is more than one party to
   the process, and that the parties are undecided on either what decision should be
   made or how it should be made.
      Hypothesis 2:
   If other perspectives exist in projects, there is no reason to believe they would not
   impart on goal setting.
      On H1: Political decision-making exists, we can assume the crowd is divided

      On H2: Different perspectives exist. We must thus assume even goal-setting
decisions may be politicized.


5. Summary and conclusions
5.1 Summary
      Introduction: Purpose

5.1.1 The contextual dimension in project literature
      Reflection on Chapter 2
                                        
5.1.2 The decision-making dimension in project literature
     Reflection on the things lacking in PM literature: Decisions are not made, they
come automatically. There is never a human choice to be made ­ appraisal, calculation
and expert judgment know no alternatives.

     On the other hand, the field of organizational behavior gives a totally different,
and very nuanced picture.

5.1.3 Synthesis of dimensions
     Contextual dimension from project literature: exists

     Decision-making dimension from project literature: does not exists

     No synthesis possible!

     Synthesizing contextual dimension from project literature with decision-making
views from organizational behavior leads to "Buttler's model" (linguistic convenience):




     [Figure]

     Explication of Buttler's model.

     Implication of Buttler's model

     Advantages of Buttler's model over view espoused by PM literature:

     1 Understanding how goals are set

     2 Usable for analysis

     3 Gives framework for analyzing hidden goals.
                                      
5.2 Conclusions and implications
      Introduction: practical  research

5.2.1 Implications for practitioners
      PM role in goal-setting (Lenfle & Koch 2010:48).

      PM merely a implementer? (Cicmil & Hodgson 2006:111)

      Relevant information for bosses in process organization as well as for project
managers.

      Too few competent and experienced PM's available as business grows (Pinto &
Kharbanda 1995:41). The accidental profession (Frame 1995:xii). New PM is typically
a former specialist (Meredith & Mantel 2010:109). Summary.

      Projects are characterized by change (Choudhury 1988:3; Meredith & Mantel
2010:501; m.fl.), thus PM's should be able to handle change.

      Consternation. Disbelief.

      Summary of implications.

5.2.2 Implications for research
      The project management discipline has had to face a tough set of challenges:
especially getting it done on the first attempt.

      The discipline has focused on building the project manager's toolbox. (Lenfle &
Koch 2010:42­43). This is no minor deed.

      But the discipline has lost it's roots ­ the goals.

      It's dangerous to know the tools, without knowing why to use them (Meredith &
Mantel 2010:35). Still, this seems to be exactly what the mainstream aims at.(Lenfle &
Koch 2010:32)

      Further the mechanistic worldview of ventral actors in the mainstream has done
nothing to help. Unwillingness to see human individuals as central actors has led into a
quagmire.

      Conclusion: Disregarding non-objective decision-making models, while
attempting to distance the project professional from fundamental decision-making has
led to a view, which could have been defensible in ancient Egypt ­ while using slave
labor to build the pyramids ­ but in today's world, where PM is spreading to ever new
fields, it is not compatible with reality.
                                       
