The Development of Sina Micro Blog Marketing in China

Introduction
Twitter is a website started by Jack Dorsey on March 21, 2006. It serves the role that people use it as online social network and microblog. After the golden days of blog, Twitter grasped the characteristic of human beings’ mind: fragmentation. Writing an article is hard but saying a sentence or just a few words is much easier, thus Twitter replaced blog to be the most popular way of social networking online immediately. Information on Twitter can be spread a lot more quickly, so if one thing is known by one person and he or she tweets about it, it is known by the world. When Osama Bin Laden was executed on May 2, 2011, Twitter users first got to know it. “Keith Urbahn, chief of staff to former US defence secretary Donald Rumsfeld wrote: ‘So I'm told by a reputable person they have killed Osama Bin Laden.’”(BBC News, “Bin Laden raid was revealed on Twitter”) The power of Twitter has been proved a lot of times, from Obama’s campaign to Egypt’s revolution.
This power is not only used in political events, but also in business. Business has the most sensitive feeling that can always find the newest way to make profits because interest is the strongest incentive. Twitter marketing is not a new thing. Companies sign up on Twitter with their brand names and post news about their companies. In Case and King’s paper Twitter Usage in the Fortune 50: A Marketing Opportunity?, they investigated2009 Fortune 50 companies and found out that 54 percent of the firms have Twitter accounts and 37 percent of them have more than one account. Moreover, 85 percent of the companies use their accounts to post news, which indicates that nowadays Twitter marketing is quite an important part of modern marketing, partly because of its broad audience, quick spread, and various forms. Sysomos conducted a survey in June 2009 and revealed that 15 percent of the people who identify themselves as marketers follow more than 2000 people, but only 0.29 percent of the rest Twitter users follow more than 2000 people. (Thomases 65)Marketers regard Twitter as a symbol of “keeping up with the times” and if a marketer doesnot use Twitter, he or she will be considered “out of game”. (Thomases 66)
The previousresearches seldom involve the comparison of Twitter marketing in Western world and in developing countries, specifically China, mostly because there is no access to Twitter in China. People in China have to go across the Chinese Great Firewall to enter Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, and a huge amount of other prohibited websites; besides, going across the Wall is much more than clicking a few times.The situation contributes to a gap between Chinese online social network and global online social network, which leads to the ignorance of the comparison of social network marketing academically. After all, how could China has Twitter marketing when Chinese people cannot sign up on Twitter? However, not allowing the access to Twitter doesnot mean that Chinese people do not have their own micro blog. Sina Micro Blog is the “Chinese Twitter”. Many famous people like movie stars and model singers used their real name to sign up and post about their lives at first and it caused the popularity of Sina Micro Blog among ordinary people. It is started on August 14, 2009, 3 years after Twitter started. Now Sina Micro Blog has become the most popular microblog website in China, taking an 87 percent share of the “tweet” activities. Having 300 million users, Sina Micro Blog has a huge potential of marketing and Chinese business along with foreign business in China have noticed and started to explore the potential. (Wikipedia, “Sina Weibo”)The late start seems to mean late development, so how is Sina Micro Blog marketing in China exactly? We have organized the rest of this paper by the introduction of the current methods that Sina Micro Blog marketing is using. The usage shows maturity and the attitude behind the simple methods shows whether Sina Micro Blog marketing is taken seriously as a means of marketing in modern Chinese business. The philosophy can be indicated by the marketing methods and the management of marketing teams, so it will also be discussed.

Method
To introduce the current situation of Sina Micro Blog marketing, a number of exampleswill be came up with, and the analysis of the examples will take a large portion of the text. Sina Micro Blog marketing, as a rather new way of online marketing, has not entered the academic world deeply, lacking serious and deep research, so specific data is difficult to find, especially general data about the whole business which requires great academic efforts to get. In this situation, the data will be first-hand, thus there will not be any references, but it will be clarified when it happens.The first-hand data is always obtained by basic methods. We follow companies on Twitter and Sina Micro Blog, count their tweets or microblogs, observe the frequency of their tweeting and the content of the tweets and micro blogs, and analyze their method and philosophy of marketing. The companies that are selected to explain the situation often have long enough history of Twitter or Sina Micro Blog use and have large enough fan teams to make the samples reliable and meaningful.
  In the analysis of the examples, the essential elements of marketing, such as methods, frequency, content, attention-drawing actions, and philosophy behind it, will be focused on.

Analysis
Marketing is eventually more about the brand than specific products, and the brand need an image. Twitter and Sina Micro Blog enables companies to express themselves like real persons, which never happens before the online marketing time started. The most important thing of setting up an image by Twitter or Sina Micro Blog is the content of tweeting or micro blogging. Most of time Sina Micro Blog serves the role as an activity publisher and that is the most common way companies use to publicize themselves, creating a regular pattern of showing up in front of public with low cost. In this aspect, companies in China do as good as Western companies in Twitter. For instance, after I follow KPMG China in Sina Micro Blog, I realized that I would connect with this company. It is all about the lives of staffs in KPMG China and the recruitment information. It micro blogged about the staffs playing football games, learning about coffee, making cakes, taking fancy pictures, and teaching children in small villages, making the life in KPMG China admirable and noble. It says nothing about the hard work and the difficulties faced in the whole auditing business, which really exists according to the news and hearsays from elders in my school. Moreover, KPMG China micro blogged a lot about the recruitment plan, showing a lot of pictures and comments about their elite program and school bus activities, which both are related to employ interns and formal staffs. In a conclusion, KPMG China uses its Sina Micro Blog account to do brand marketing towards potential employees. It first describes desirable life in KPMG China, and then provides all the information about applying for a position.
Sina Micro Blog has also become an excellent way of dealing with public relations crisis. Bawang is a company in China that provides shampoo with Chinese herbal medicine ingredient, preventing hair loss. On July 14, 2010, Next Magazine in Hong Kong published an article called Bawang Leads to Cancer, accusing that many kinds of Bawang Chinese herbal medicine shampoo had been tested by Hong Kong Notary and the result was that there is dioxane found, which is recognized to be cancerogenic in USA. It is astonishing and Bawang’s products had to be suspended that afternoon. Despite of the traditional ways of handling this kind of crisis, Bawang turned to the new media path, using Sina Micro Blog to deal with it. Bawang signed up immediately after the event burst out and micro blogged about the rumor, explaining and posting positive news about the company.(Gao, pars. 11) Bawang micro blogged 17 times that day and 17 times afterwards about the event, getting 766 forwards and 1122 comments, which is quite an impressive result given that it is a new-signed-up account. Bawang is a famous brand in China, so the event drew a lot of attention. The quick reaction of Bawang effectivelycontrolled the public opinion, won enough time for testing in the State Food and Drug Administration, and got the testing results that the amount of dioxane in Bawang shampoo is not enough to harm the consumers. It is a successful example of using Sina Micro Blog to handle public relations crisis, indicating that Chinese companies have got the sense of using new online methods to deal with problems in terms of marketing. Sina Micro Blog is full of people who love forwarding. They are the prefect audience of this kind of companies’ micro blog. The broad and quick spread of truth is essential when there are rumors. In the past, it is not basically possible because people tend to believe untruthful opinions, but today, a website like Sina Micro Blog can make it happen. That is why Sina Micro Blog has become the first choice of companies when they face rumors.
In addition, a common way of Sina Micro Blog marketing is to use the hot topic of the moment to draw attention. On June 23, 2011, a heavy rain in Beijing kept many people indoors, only getting Sina Micro Blog to kill time. At that day, one micro blog about using Durex condoms to protect shoes from getting wet suddenly became the hottest in Sina Micro Blog. A person posted a series of pictures showing how to sheath shoes with Durex condoms along with words like “With Durex, no wet shoes”. The creativity and humor draws a lot of attention, getting 90140 times of forwarding and 17847 comments, involving 95015 micro bloggers, and becoming much hotter than the heavy rain itself that day. In fact, this is a case of Durex’s Sina Micro Blog marketing. That person who posted the micro blog is a member of Durex’s marketing team, and the micro blog was forwarded by Durex’s official Sina Micro Blog account at the beginning. An issue that everybody faces adds the sense of humor and creativity is a success in Sina Micro Blog marketing. Although Durex is a foreign company, the managing and marketing ideas of Durex China are made by Chinese staffs, who are mostly young or middle-aged Sina Micro Blog users. They realized the essential characteristic of Sina Micro Blog and use it to contribute to the marketing job they are responsible for. Actually, in the example above, Durex’s marketing team not only started a topic and made people laugh, but also conducted an effective move of marketing. There was a huge discussion of Durex as shoes’ protector that day, and though the discussion is mostly about fun, 55% of the discussion mentioned “Durex”, 34% of the discussion showed positive emotion like recognition of the brand and 3% of the discussion is clearly about purchasing Durex products.
Companies use marketing strategy to publicize the brand, and the key of brand marketing is showing up all the time. Never let people forget about you. Only when people need something, your company’s name is the only word that emerges in his or her mind, your brand marketing is doing well. Twitter or Sina Micro Blog marketing makes showing up all the time such an easy task to accomplish that it is hard to imagine some company would let its account on Sina Micro Blog remain silent for a week or even longer. But this is exactly the situation in China since the ignorance of the significance of Sina Micro Blog marketing is still common. Many companies know that being present all the time is the basic rule of online social network marketing, but given that Sina Micro Blog marketing has not developed to be complete, not every company pay attention to this rule. KPMG China, for example, micro blogged almost once or twice in one week after the recruitment period past. It is natural since KPMG China recognizes itself as propaganda for recruitment, but this kind of action makes it absent from public notice in a very long time throughout the year, which is absolutely not expected in terms of marketing. KPMG US on Twitter, on the contrary, keeps showing up. It tweets several times a day even when there is no information about recruitment to give. 
The example of KPMG China is classic, it seems that the account of the company is charged by a girl who gets a lot of stuff to do and Sina Micro Blog marketing is just as important as a copy task. We wish that as the importance of Sina Micro Blog marketing becomes more and more obvious, companies would take it more seriously and actually use it as a true marketing tool rather than a game. Forming a team to charge the whole Sina Micro Blog marketing is one way to make it professional and well-took-care-of. One person is easy to ignore the importance of maintaining Sina Micro Blog, forget about micro blogging on a daily basis or an even more regular basis, and be sluggish about holding up new events and thinking about new ideas, but when it comes to a team, and the team’s responsibility is clearly Sina Micro Blog marketing, the attitude will be more serious and brainstorming will be truly useful and productive.
For example, the Durex Sina Micro Blog marketing team works quite effectively, which is rare in the Chinese business environment and this is a team that can show the philosophy of Sina Micro Blog marketing well. “The topic of SNS is to share and it changed the way in which companies communicate with consumers. If a brand does not consider changing, it will face the danger of being eliminated,”says Chu Wen, the managing partner of Ogilvy Public Relations, “the best about SNS is that it forces every brand to be sincere.” Being sincere is fundamental for the success of Twitter or Sina Micro Blog marketing. The example above about KPMG China indicates that many companies are using Sina Micro Blog marketing, but they are not sincere enough. Durex, on the other hand, at least formed a team to conduct it. The team consists of about 20 persons, who are all humorous, smart, and talkative people. The team splits the marketing job into many specific aspects; for example, there are 3 aspects of work in terms of content of the micro blog: content, copywriter, and reply. Content staffs are in charge of the most information publishing. Copywriter staffs are in charge of planning topics and reply staffs are responsible for screening interesting information among all the micro blogs that @ Durex’s official micro blog account and reply some comments. The meticulous division of labor makes it possible to take Sina Micro Blog marketing to a more professional level. In addition, everything posted on Durex’s official Sina Micro Blog are classified in a data base and the amounts of forwarding and comments are counted every 5 days. At the end of each month, the data will be analyzed deeply to find out what is good and what is bad, and this kind of analysis can be real and opportune, pointing out the direction that the marketing should head to.
Furthermore, Durex’s success in the competition of Sina Micro Blog marketing can be attributed to the clear positioning of the brand. At first, Durex position itself as an Otaku, which means “indoorsman”. But later, Durex’s marketing team realized that it is not an appropriate position for Durex, so they changed into an image of a man, who is gentle and evil at the same time and knows deeply about life and entertainment, just like a handsome guy in a night pub. This image suits Durex, a brand of condoms, very well, and gives Durex’s Sina Micro Blog marketing team a much larger space to develop ideas. Choosing suitable positioning and making the image real and vivid are the basic steps of functioning a company’s Sina Micro Blog marketing. The setting-up part is fundamental, but the maintaining part is the one that determines whether the marketing can go on for a long time, accumulate a huge fans foundation, and make the marketing really useful. According to Chu Wen, there is difference between traditional media and social media about the company positioning. By traditional media companies tell consumers who they are and consumers just accept it; however, companies that use social media to set up images communicate with consumers like person to person. Consumers get dynamic images through the communication and the companies’ action, and that is why the maintenance of Sina Micro Blog account is very significant. Taking Durex as an example, the language of Durex’s official Sina Micro Blog account is always humorous and lighthearted since the positioningwas fixed. When Durex and Fang Zhouzi, a Chinese fraud-fighter, had a war of words, this language style was quite attractive. No matter how offensive Fang Zhouzi was, Durex always took it easy and behaved gently. After the event, Durex gained 6,000 more fans, and Fang Zhouzi lost a few thousand fans.
Durex China is a great example of the best companies can do with Sina Micro Blog. When Durex signed up on Sina Micro Blog, one of its competitors, Jissbon, had gotten 10700 fans; however, Durex’s number of fans reached 210,000 in the October of 2011, but Jissbon’s number of fans is just 20,000.(CEIBS Business Review, “Interpretation of the micro blogging‘fans’ behavior”)
This is the result of good marketing management and proper self-positioning. In a nutshell, when you treat Sina Micro Blog marketing seriously, it feeds back you richly.

Discussion
  China, as a country governed by People’s Congress and led only by Communist Party, has been in an awkward position in the world for a long time. As one of the young generation of China, my feeling about my own country is also complicated. China was always a strong country until 1840, and then it went through anearly modern history full of failure and shame. We got a chance to evaluate ourselves again, but the danger of national subjugation did not give Chinese people to develop a new way of dealing with the modern world. Communism, in a simple and plain way, brought Chinese people together to fight against invaders. However, we did not do well in the transition from an old country suffered from wars for tens of years to a modern country that has enough strengthand dignity to develop a healthy and friendly relationship with Western world. We want to accept new thoughts and develop our traditional philosophy at the same time, which leads to the chaos of thought, especially among the young generation. Similarly, we want to let the country be democratic, but releasing power steadily is much more difficult than fighting for the power. The information block in the Internet is only one aspect of China’s struggle, but it also involves another conflict in modern China. We want to be open to the high-speeded world, catching up with it and developing in the same speed, but we have to keep a distance from the modern time in order to stabilize the internal Chinese society.
  The distance, in certain ways, forms the reason why we always follow behind the steps of Western countries, not only economy and technology, but also information and thought. We cannot get access to Twitter, so we create Sina Micro Blog 3 years later. Twitter or Sina Micro Blog marketing is still in the experimental phase, no matter in Western countries or in China, and that is the main reason that there is no huge gap between Twitter marketing and Sina Micro Blog marketing. However, just like other techniques or market operating elements, Twitter or Sina Micro Blog marketing would embrace its innovative time, and at that time, it is essential that if China can grasp the opportunity and catch up immediately, or even start the innovation. Steve Jobs used his talent to start Apple Inc. and create a series of digital products, changing people’s relationship with digital time and digital products’developing direction forever. David Ogilvy, from the 1940s to 1970s, took Ogilvy&Mather Worldwide to a peak of advertising, starting a new period of advertising and creating a complete and mature advertising philosophy at the same time. This kind of innovation, I believe, will also happen to Twitter or Sina Micro Blog marketing one day. All is needed is the maturity of this way of marketing and a talent’s birth. No one can control where this talent will be born, but companies and scholars can control the maturity of the marketing environment. 
China is in a time of transition in all aspects, and the policy now is to do it steadily. However, the development of economy and market has always been fast since the reform and opening-up policy in 1970s, so it is reasonable to say that Sina Micro Blog marketing will develop faster and reach its innovative point early enough to meet the innovative point of Twitter marketing, or better, Sina Micro Blog marketing becomes Twitter marketing, because then people in China can sign up on Twitter and get information as free as people in Western countries. On the other hand, Chinese society is moving forward too fast, distracting people’s attention from the really valuable things to the illusions caused by the high developing speed. The emergence of cheap copy products, for example, is always considered to be the sign of the lack of imagination and innovation ability. Furthermore, the popularity of cheap copy products shows that Chinese society, as a whole, has not formed the appreciation of original thoughts and ideas. Many famous companies copy other companies’ new idea to make their own products. For example, the copy of iPhone is quite commonin Chinese cellphone market, and when people cannot afford iPhone, these copycats are perfect substitutes. No one really care about the originality of the cellphone, and if this kind of people take the larger part of the consumers, it is hard to predict that some companies will pay much on innovation since simply copying can lead to much lower cost thus much higher profit. Cheap copying is just an indication of Chinese society’s ignorance of intellectual value, and the ignorance certainly does not contribute to a good environment for a breakthrough in the case of Sina Micro Blog marketing. The only hope is that in a few years, people will start to realize the importance of intellectual originality, and it is not too late.
