
COBIT AS AUDITING AND CONTROL FRAMEWORK

Introduction

All control frameworks can be organized into three broad categories, namely business oriented controls, like COSO (Committee of Sponsoring Organization) or SAS (Statement of Auditing Standards); IT (Information Technology) focused on controls namely, ITIL (The IT Infrastructure Library) or ISO/IEC 17799:2000 (The International Organization for Standardization/the Electro technical Commission); and a third category of controls that bring together IT controls and business goals, particularly, COBIT (Control Objectives for Information and related Technology). 

COBIT is a framework developed by ISACA (Information Systems Audit and Control Association) for information technology management and governance. Its function is to support organizations in achieving their business objectives in the best possible way, and its mission is “to research, develop, publicize, and promote an authoritative, up-to-date, international set of generally accepted information technology control objectives for day-to-day use by business managers and auditors.” (ISACA, 2000). Originally, COBIT was proposed to be used as a benchmarking tool comprising the best practices related to IT controls (Tuttle and Vandervelde, 2007); however, it has been recognized also as a control framework, for its capability to offer a defined and recognized set of IT control processes, objectives, and activities (Ramos, 2004), and many international accounting companies have employed this framework for measuring the effectiveness of internal controls of their clients (Winters, 2004). Control frameworks are widely used by organizations and auditors during the internal controls’ design and evaluation phases; but especially the applicability of internal control frameworks has increased with the passage of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, Auditing Standard No.2 in 2004 (Tuttle and Vandervelde, 2007), and Auditing Standard No. 5 in 2007, which forces organizations to implement internal control frameworks and to report on their effectiveness (Bernroider and Ivanov, 2011). Organizations and auditors have been adopting COBIT to supplement COSO (Committee of Sponsoring Organizations) framework (Tuttle and Vandervelde, 2007). Ridley et al. (2004) claim that since COBIT framework takes into account all major aspects of information and its supportive IT functions, COBIT could be used as a tool for providing an appropriate control system for IT. Moreover, Summerfield (2005) claims that “every major accounting firm has adopted COBIT in connection with their review of internal control”.   

Prior research offers empirical evidence showing that COBIT framework can assist organizations in complying with SOX requirements (Lin, Guan, and Fang, 2010); it can also provide guidelines for auditors to internal control structure and metrics assessments (Lainhart, 2001; Wallhoff, 2004); and it is suitable for high level governance and control (Gaynor, 2002; Hardy, 2006). However, observations by Ridley et al. (2008) suggest that in spite of increasing popularity and applicability of COBIT, it has received very limited empirical and theoretical support from academia and little academic attention has been devoted to investigation of utilization of COBIT (Ridley et al., 2004). This term paper will collect the issues and the results of different academic research studies and try to form a general portrait of concepts, methods, and applicability of COBIT framework for control and auditing purposes so as to gather the evidence whether COBIT can be useful tool for auditors and internal controllers. Thus, the term paper will provide a contribution to the theoretical studies in the field. The preference will be given to the scientific articles published in peer-reviewed journals. The articles will be selected in a manner that they discuss the problem under the investigation from different perspectives.

The reminder of this paper is divided into three content sections. The following section outlines the development and the general concepts of the framework. The third part will survey the applicability of the framework, based on the review of the literature. The content section four closes this term paper with conclusions and guidelines for future research in this area.       

2 Framework
Frameworks are widely used by organizations and auditors in order to guide the design and evaluation of internal controls. Especially, the role and applicability of internal control frameworks has grown in importance after the release of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 and Auditing Standard No. 2 (AS2) in 2004. 

Historical development
In 1996 the Information Systems Audit and Control Foundation (ISACF) published the Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology (COBIT). ISACF was founded in 1969 by a group of IT auditors. Currently, this organization is known as Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) and is a global organization with over 50 000 members in more than 140 countries. COBIT was developed in the response to growing need for control within IT organizations and at that point lacking network of information and guidance in the industry. As the role of IT continuing to increase, in 1998 ISACA established separate institute, the IT Governance Institute (ITGI), who is responsible for COBIT.

Initially, COBIT was developed as a tool to control IT and reduce risks within IT organizations and was aimed at finance and e-business industries. However, with time it took more business oriented course and nowadays it provides an essential guidance to management and process owners on how to optimize resources and asset allocation and what should be done within an organization to achieve the goals. The second edition of COBIT was released in 1998. This version was enhanced by new material on IT Governance and Management Guidelines and released as third edition in 2000. The current version, fourth, was released in 2005. ISACA claims that organizations benefit of using COBIT because it helps to understand their IT systems and determine the optimum level of security and control that is required to protect organization’s assets through the implementation of IT control model. Damianides (2004) in this respect carried out the case study at Charles Schwab Corporation, one of largest U.S. financial services firms, and investigated what benefits company achieved by implementing COBIT. Besides the advantages of established IT governance program, consistent risk management and enhanced IT and business processes, it also ensured that audit approach is consistent with regulatory guidelines, it educated stakeholders on control concepts, and improved information systems control environment.

Concept and methodology 
COBIT is based on the concept that IT has to provide the information that is crucial for the organization in order to achieve its objectives. The framework serves as a high level guidance for management and business process owners. Under this framework, all business processes have assigned owners; meanwhile business process owners have total responsibility for all aspects of the business processes, but COBIT promotes a process focus and process ownership through adequate controls. 

The framework is based on three separate documents: Control Objectives, that describes the 34 processes and the control objectives to each process employed by COBIT. The COBIT control objectives are divided into four domains that describe the risks and activities within IT that need to be managed. The four COBIT domains are: Plan and Organize, Acquire and Implement, Deliver and Support and Monitor and Evaluate, and they provide an understanding of the purpose of the processes. The domains are divided into 34 different high level control objectives. Within each domain there are specific processes that an institution should apply at different levels of the IT organization in order to address and achieve detailed and specific IT related control objectives. Each process comprises detailed control objectives, activities, roles, different metrics and a measurement scale. The roles consider responsibilities that are associated with activities.

Control Objectives
The owner of the framework, ITGI, defines control as “the policies, procedures, practices and organizational structures designed to provide reasonable assurance that business objectives will be achieved and that undesired events will be prevented or detected and corrected”. Whereas IT Control Objective is “a statement of the desired result or purpose to be achieved by implementing control procedures in a particular IT activity”. Organizations need information in order to satisfy their business objectives; moreover, the information has to follow certain criteria. In the framework, COBIT combines the principles embedded in existing and known reference models and establishes the list of the business requirements for information. These requirements concern quality, fiduciary, reliability, and security. Control objectives are concerned with the IT resources, which are identified in COBIT as data in its broadest sense, application systems (both manual and programmed procedures), technology in a sense of hardware, operating systems, database management systems, networking, multimedia, facilities for housing and supporting information systems, and people, accommodating staff skills, awareness and productivity to plan, organize, acquire, deliver, support and monitor information systems and services.

COBIT defines high-level control objectives for each process for identifying important information criteria, stating resource requirement, and providing guidelines for IT processes controls. Each high-level control objective is supplemented by detailed control objectives, 318 in all, explaining how control should be carried out over that particular process and how objectives should be built. The underlying theory for the classification of the control objectives is based on the approach that there are three levels of IT efforts when considering the management of IT resources. The first layer is activities and tasks that are needed to achieve a measurable result. Processes are then defined on the second level and combine sequences of joined activities or tasks. At the third level processes are grouped together into domains where they correspond with responsibility areas in an organizational structure and are coherent IT processes lifecycle. The conceptual framework is approached from three vantage points: IT-processes (domains, processes, activities), IT-resources (people, applications/systems, technology, facilities, data) and information criteria (quality, fiduciary, security). 

3 Applicability
Frameworks are helpful tools to be used in the assessment of internal controls because they give structure to the control process, conceptualize the most important aspects of the control, and make assessment more reliable and complete. This is particularly valuable in information technology concentrated surroundings when systems, processes, and organization increase in their complexity and auditors need plans to structure their work, and when due to the changes in legislations more and more emphasis has been placed on information controls.   
Tuttle and Vandervelde (2007) refer to prior field studies by Fedorowitz and Gelinas (1998) and Lainhart (2001), which claim that COBIT can be used for internal controls assessment and corporate governance, and empirically examine the conceptual model underlying COBIT for its applicability to an audit setting and whether it can guide auditors during assessment of internal controls and their compliance with COSO requirements. Auditors and internal controllers have been referring to COBIT as a tool to supplement COSO. In order to support COBIT as an IT internal control framework for an audit function, Tuttle and Vandervelde (2007) use COBIT assessment constructs provided by panel of experts and supplemented by postings from the Information Systems audit and Control Assocoation’s general listserv. So as to strengthen their study findings and produce consistent and compelling evidence, the authors used two separate data sources, survey data and archival data, to examine whether COBIT is capable to support operational, compliance, and financial auditing. The findings from the study suggest that COBIT framework can be used for risk assessment of the process. It also can be used for providing help to auditors during IT auditing. Therefore, COBIT could be viewed as an appropriate supplement to COSO and in an IT setting. However, the final results also revealed that the framework is not capable to support some of items of the distinct dimensions.    
Chan (2004) argues that COBIT is in line with SOX requirements for compliance efforts, control activities and information and communication demands; therefore it serves auditors as a helpful tool in auditing IT in compliance with SOX. Lin, Guan, and Fang (2010) carry out the study where they empirically investigate whether COBIT can provide an adequate support for auditors in evaluating IT internal control structures. The data was collected through sending out 925 questionnaires to Taiwanese certified public accountant firms. In the final analysis 128 (13,84%) questionnaires were used. The paper provides evidence that auditors can use COBIT as guidelines when developing approach for internal control structure as well as adopting COBIT helps in complying with SOX. However, an important observation made by the authors is that auditors who use COBIT should have greater IT knowledge and should have received better technical training.           
The IT Process Institute (2006) carried out a survey and investigated whether IT controls can improve audit and internal control activities. The study surveyed respondents from 98 IT organizations and covered many industries. The survey questions were designed so to support analysis of COBIT control activities and audit performance measures. The evidence obtained was consistent with expectations that control activities if they are designed in line with COBIT framework, have significant impact on audit measures and control activities. In addition, the results of the study also revealed that if applied, the best practices outlined in the COBIT framework do improve overall performance measures of the organization. 

4 Discussion and conclusion
COBIT is an international and generally accepted IT control framework supporting institutions during implementation of IT Governance concepts covering the entire organization. The framework has been adopted in corporations and by governmental entities throughout the world. Initially, its purpose was to assist management in aligning control objectives with business goals, but recently the framework has been gaining more attention from auditors and internal controllers as has been found valuable in assisting IT managers and consultants to evaluate the state of internal control and to manage IT related risks in the organization. One of the reasons why the framework besides its main intentions has been also used for other purposes, like internal controls and auditing, is that released SOX and COSO require that organizations implement an appropriate controls, but did not provide a guidance or endorsed a specific IT control framework on what and how should be controlled. Therefore auditors and management were looking for tools that could provide the required support and COBIT was one of those.      

The evidence provided by academic studies generally support COBIT as a control and audit framework; however, it has been argued that COBIT does not adequately consider the environment around the organization (Tuttle and Vandervelde, 2007) as the variables associated with the competitive, legal and economic environment around the organization might impact the IT processes, but they are not addressed through associated listeserv postings. This has been noted as a weakness within the security issues in COBIT (Tuttle and Vandervelde, 2007). The reason could be related to the circumstances, that COBIT actually was not intended to be an auditing framework or control framework; instead it was developed as a tool for managing IT so that it best complies with organization’s business goals. COBIT is built so that it incorporates the best practices for a company, however, that does not oblige them to coincide with auditing perspective.

Another aspect that researchers ask to pay attention, one example is study by Abu-Musa (2008), is auditor skills in auditing IT processes on objectives. Abu-Musa (2008) calls for the need to enhance internal auditors’ knowledge and skills of computerized information systems in order to be capable to plan, direct, supervise and review the work performed. Currently, it leads to the situation when internal auditors focus primarily on traditional IT risks and controls, such as IT data integrity, privacy and security, and insufficient attention has been directed to information system risks per se. Thus, one might not obtain all possible benefits that COBIT as a control framework provides.  

In spite of COBIT as a framework has been getting attention from practitioners and has been advised to use as a basis for internal control theory development, this topic has been lacking attention from academics. Ridley et al. (2004) performed extensive literature review and summarized findings and research efforts relevant to COBIT and reported that only 7% of publications are classified as having an academic orientation. Council (2006) also argued that “despite myriad literature on COBIT, very little rigorous research exists”. Ridley and coauthors (2004) speculate that it might be because the electronic sources available on COBIT are primarily designed for IT and audit practitioners. Knowledge creation about COBIT conceptual framework is important for three target audiences. First, users of the framework, who have to know if the underlying conceptual model is reliable. Second, auditors, accounting firms, and policy-makers who need evidence which either supports or rejects the conceptual foundation of auditing practices. Third, it could assist in developing internal control theory, as no academic theory of internal control exists so far.        

Considering that COBIT has been widely used as an auditing framework and scarce number of academic studies about the framework and its implications, there is clear demand for such studies. Tuttle and Vandervelde (2007) call for developing an exhaustive, substantiate, real-world related, and generally accepted theory of IT controls. The relevant topics could cover control shortages and aspects of IT audit risks.       
