Developing insurance packages for young adults ­ Are comprehensiblecommunication and inexpensive services the key to appeal to young customers?Introduction  In recent years, insurances have been marketed to customers with various types of advertisements,campaigns and promotions, and often the focus has been on communication of the benefits that canbe achieved with the insurances. Although home insurance is perhaps the most common type ofinsurances, still many Finnish people ­ especially the young adults ­ have not insured their house orapartment with a home insurance (Kervinen, 2009). The research by insurance company TrygVesta(2009) suggests that the poor reputation of the insurance industry might affect that young adults donot rely on insurance companies, and therefore do not purchase insurances; and that young adultsregard the insurance prices being unaffordable for them. As contrary results (FinanssialanKeskusliitto, 2010) have been presented too, it is of great interest to know, how insurancecompanies have taken into account these kinds of research results in their marketing for the segmentyoung adults. Therefore, there obviously is need for a contrastive research that examines, how homeinsurances are marketed to young adults by the insurance companies. As the earlier researches havenot examined the marketing material itself, it is still unclear, how the marketing material is designedto appeal to young adults.This paper examines, what kind of benefits, attributes and insurance packages are presented in theelectronic marketing material of three Finnish insurance companies (Pohjola, if and Fennia), whoall have created special insurance packages for young adults. The material is analysed qualitativelyto be able to explain and understand the motives and possible differences in the marketing material.The purpose of the study is to map, which attributes the insurance companies emphasize in theirmarketing material (websites, e-catalogues, product pages and online advertisements), and how dothey motivate, why young adults should purchase an insurance package from them.  Background and research aim  Internet has made it possible for everyone to compare and purchase any products and services. Thisapplies also to financial services, for instance insurances (Robertshaw 2011, 13). Although thepurchase of a young adult insurance package is very easy, still many households lack for examplehome insurance (Hakanen, 2009). According to Hakanen 38 % of young adults, aged between 18-28 years, do not have a home insurance and more than a third do not even have an accidentinsurance. It is quite surprising considering that life-related issues (such as unemployment,temporary dismissal and disability) were regarded as the most important areas to be covered withinsurances among the young people in a recent survey (Vakuutustutkimus, 2010). It is still unclear,why so many young adults do not buy a home insurance and other related insurances.According to life insurance company Prudential's publishing from 2011, insurance companies haveconcentrated servicing senior customers, but the needs of their children (generations X and Y, bornbetween 1965 and 1994) have been forgotten (Prudential, 2011). According to TrygVesta's research(in Hakanen, 2009), Nordic young adults regard insurances as difficult, indefinite and complicatedservices. The image of insurance companies is rather weak, and over half of the respondents inTrygVestas research believed that insurance companies would do anything in case of an accidentfor not need to pay the compensation to their customers (Kervinen, 2009). Therefore young adultsmight not be eager to purchase insurances. Another reason is according to the Trygvesta's researchthat young adults feel insurances being unaffordable for them (Kervinen, 2009).Federation of Finnish Financial Services (FFI) explores every fourth year the Finnish consumersattitudes towards financial services. The recent study from 2010 reveals that the attitudes towardsinsurance companies have improved compared to the earlier researchers and 69% of therespondents regarded insurance companies as reliable partners to make a commitment with. Theamount of purchased home insurances has grown in each age group of Finnish people, but still only68% of young adults who live in rented flats, have purchased a home insurance. (Vakuutustutkimus,2010.) Nevertheless, it is somewhat inconsistent that 90% of the respondents regarded homeinsurances being an important insurance for every household.As can be seen, there is need for a research that explores how the poor home insurance rates can beexplained. The earlier researchers have not investigated whether the reasons for not taking a homeinsurance are price and/or policy conditions related. Another unknown research question is, whetherinsurance companies are miscommunicating the benefits of insurances and the company image thata consumer could identify oneself with.The research task for this study therefore is to identify the attributes in insurance companies homeinsurance packages' marketing that are not like to appeal to young adults.The sub research problem is to evaluate, whether insurance companies have priced themselvesunaffordable for young adults and whether the communication towards young adults is ineffectiveand difficult to understand.The working hypothesis in the study is that the motivations could be price related or have to do withthe flaws in the insurance company ­ customer communication.Defining central concepts and presentation of case companies  As a home insurance package (or insurance package) in this study is regarded a bundle of insuranceservices that include home insurance and/or complementing insurances such as a health insurance, atravel insurance or an accident insurance.The customer segment young adults refers to a group of people aged between 18-30 years.Communication refers to all the customer care channels that insurance companies in Finland offerfor their customers. Depending on the company, the channels might include offices or drop-incentres, telephone service, online services and partner networks.Marketing material consists of electronic marketing and advertisement: e-brochures, web servicesand web catalogues and online advertisements and customer magazines.Case companiesPohjola is a part of the Op-Pohjola group and is at the moment the leading corporate and public-sector insurer. In terms of premiums written, Pohjola is the Finnish largest insurance company. (Op-Pohjola, 2012.)if is the leading insurer in the Nordic countries and a part of the Sampo group. It has approximately3,6 million customers (if, 2012).Fennia is a part of the Fennia group and offers various insurance services such as life, non-life andpension insurances (Fennia, 2012).Structure of the studyThe paper is divided into three sections. The first section discusses the current insurance offeringfor the young adults of the case insurance companies and problematizes why young adults do nottend to purchase insurances. The second section investigates, how home insurance packages aremarketed to young adults, and identifies attributes that are emphasized in the current marketingcommunication and material. This empirical section also explores, whether the insurance packagesfor young adults are unaffordable as they are stated to be. The concluding section presents theimprovement ideas how insurance companies could develop their marketing and communication forthe segment young adults so that the insurance companies could better respond to the challengesand weaknesses revealed by the earlier studies.Literature review    Online buying behaviour  The electronic commerce (e-commerce) has grown rapidly during the last years. The foregoers inonline shopping has been young people, and according to the earlier researches age is one of themajor reasons that affects online buying, especially impulsive purchases. (Wells, Parboteeah &Valacich 2011; 33, 35.) When it comes to the X and Y generations that were discussed earlier, themarketers should according to Prudential (2011) know the differences between people of differentage. According to Prudential vice president and chief marketing officer Mark Hug "today'sconsumers do not want to be `sold' insurance - - they want to be empowered to buy it" (Prudential2011, 2). The insurance company Prudential has compiled a list of attributes that generation X andY consumers appreciate in insurance services. The list illustrate appealing attributes for lifeinsurances, but since the purchase process of all other types of insurances is quite similar, the list isfor the most part applicable to home insurance packages too. According to Prudential (2011, 2) thefollowing attributes appeal to generations X and Y in insurance services:Easy-to-understand policiesAffordabilityConvenienceAccessibilityValue-added coverageAbility to meet multiple needsConvertibilityNo coverage gapsLevel premiumsAdequate death benefitA highly rated carrierA trusted advisor  Why should the insurance companies then be interested in attributes that appeal for certaincustomer segments? At least for offering good customer service and creating profits by acquiringnew customers. By offering for example insurance products that fulfil the customer's needs, thecustomer becomes very likely more satisfied with the company compared to a situation wherehis/her needs would not have been taken into account. As Saaty (2011, 291) explains, "customersatisfaction is the key issue for increasing customer loyalty". Loyalty is of course important for anycompany to create a solid income flow and i.e. to create positive word-of-mouth and to improve thecompany image. According to the research by Saaty, highly satisfied customers are also very likelyto purchase new insurance policies in future (Saaty 2011, 298).  The main issue therefore is, how to market the insurances online by a way that appeals tocustomers, causes (impulsive) insurance purchases and communicates positive image of thecompany. According to Saaty three factors that insurance customers are not typically satisfied withare "the advertisement of the company, the promotions and discounts of the company and mostimportantly the claim settlement process of the insurance companies" (Saaty 2011, 298). The resultsare similar to the TrygVesta's research that was presented earlier, indicating that affordable price,clear and easy-to-understand communication and the simple insurance purchase process are the keyattributes that young adult customers appreciate in case of insurance services.Taking in consideration the special nature of online buying, the earlier researches suggest thatsecurity and privacy issues, easiness of the checkout process and provided information on theinternet site are three key factors that correlate positively for making online purchases (Bellman,Lohse & Johnson 1999; 34, 35, 38). In addition environmental features such as navigability of thewebsite, security, download speed, design of the website and pleasantness of the website are factorsthat affect positively the customers purchase intentions, especially the impulsive ones (Wells et al.2011, 35).Empirical research and methodology  A qualitative study was conducted to analyse the marketing material of the insurance packages foryoung adults. The case companies were selected with purposeful sampling. The online marketingmaterial was collected on 3rd of March from the websites of the case companies. Each of thecompanies has an insurance package for young adults that include usually home insurance that canbe complemented with other insurances. In the table 1 below the information regarding each of thepackages is collected. The mandatory insurances that the packages have to include are marked with(M) and complementary insurance services with (C). The price of the package is calculated with thefollowing information: a flat in Helsinki with 30 square meters, the insured person is a 25-year oldman who is single and student. The compensation amounts are the insurance company's suggestedmaximum amounts.[Table]Analysis of the dataThe material will be analysed with content analysis. (a brief description of the method and theanalyse process here).Discussion and conclusions  Discussion of the analysed marketing material: evaluation of the simplicity of the communication(used terminology, easiness to purchase an insurance package and to modify it, availability andexplanation regarding the insurance policies etc) and prices (discounts, campaigns, possibility topay in instalments etc).