Security Threats in Humanitarian Logistics 
A focus on disaster relief operations
1. Introduction 
The Asian tsunami 2004, the Post-election crisis in Kenya 2007, the earthquake in Haiti 2010, the floods in Pakistan 2010, these are a few of many humanitarian crises that have taken place recently. Van Wassenhove (2006) estimates that up to 80 % of the costs related to the humanitarian aid is due to logistics. Therefore the logistics operations in humanitarian relief, i.e. humanitarian logistics are of essence in any crisis response. Humanitarian logistics differs from ordinary logistics due to the special environment the humanitarian supply chain functions in. Humanitarian logistics can be divided into two main fields: continuous aid and disaster relief. Especially disaster relief operations are faced with challenges that do not affect commercial supply chains to the same extent. (Kovács and Spens, 2007) 

There are several constraints that humanitarian logistics have to deal with. For example unpredictable supply and demand, lack of information, biased funding, lack of information, destabilized infrastructure, cultural and language barriers, and a lack of cooperation between humanitarian actors are challenges humanitarian logistics faces (Kovács and Spens, 2007). Gustavsson (2003) raises the issue of lack of investment in technology and communication, a lack of capacity, and security threats. These before mentioned studies, and several other studies, for example Pettit and Beresford (2009), focus on the whole picture of challenges for the humanitarian relief chain in a wide scope of disasters. However, when studying cases like the earthquake in Haiti (IFRC, 2010) and post-election crisis in Kenya in 2007 (Hertz, 2011), it is evident that there is one challenge that affects the overall supply chain externally – security constraints. Where supply, demand and information management can be handled through management tools and preparedness, security issues usually come from external sources (van Wassenhove 2006). For people engaged in any humanitarian operations, security is an issue and the organizations they work for are trying to provide their workers guidelines as on how to avoid security threats. (Roberts, 2005 p.15) especially since Sheik et. al. (2000) point out that several humanitarian organizations think that the death toll among humanitarian workers is on the rise. 

As Kovács and Spens (2007 and 2009) conclude, the field of humanitarian logistics is a relatively little studied area in the field of logistics and many aspects have not gathered that much attention academically. The issue of security as an overall impediment for the logistical operations has been mentioned but not studied. In other fields of research there is though research in security related issues, for example Thomas and Tow (2002) states that “‘human security’ is a promising but still underdeveloped paradigmatic approach to understanding contemporary security politics”. Human security is a paradigm that focuses on a more human-centered view in security issues related to international relations (IR). The concept of human security challenges the traditional way of interpreting security related to states and sovereignty. (Thomas and Tow, 2002) This more “people-oriented view” could be related to the field of humanitarian operations, but there has so far been very little research to fill this gap. Therefore the aim of this paper is to try to see the linkages between challenges and security threats in humanitarian logistics, related to the concept of “human security”. In addition to this I will try to map out the major security treats in humanitarian logistics disaster relief operations. 
1.1. Relevance of the study
As Kovács and Spens (2007 and 2009) conclude, the field of humanitarian logistics is a relatively little studied area in the field of logistics and many aspects have not gathered that much attention academically. The issue of security as an overall impediment for the logistical operations has been mentioned but not studied. Therefore my aim in this paper is to try to 
Map out the major security treats in humanitarian logistics disaster relief operations. 
1.2. Method 
The paper will be a literature study and will focus on reviewing the existing literature and field studies to see what views they provide on the security matter. The theoretical aspects provided by the research articles in the field of both humanitarian logistics and human security will be used as analytical tools. The knowledge gained will then be analyzed to see if there is a more general pattern concerning security threats in humanitarian logistics. My intention is to use the current research as a base for creating a framework for identifying challenges and risks concerning security in the humanitarian supply chain. 


2. Literature review and theoretical framework
In this literature review I will first look at the challenges related to security that are mentioned in humanitarian logistics and then elaborate on the concept of human security. This theoretical knowledge will then be used to analyze the interrelations between the two fields and possible patterns of security threats in humanitarian logistics. 
2.1. Humanitarian logistics 
The aim of humanitarian logistics, that makes it different from basic business logistics, is that humanitarian logistics provide beneficiaries in need with the immediate relief in different kinds of disasters (Kovács and Spens, 2007). When discussing humanitarian logistics, it is important to note the complex environment of humanitarian operations. This has a lot to do with the differences in disaster-types discussed by Van Wassenhove (2006). Disasters can be either natural or man-made, sudden-onset or slow-onset (Figure 1).
[Table]
This division of disasters would indicate a difference in context of disasters. When it comes to the challenges related to the disaster types Kovács and Spens (2009) further elaborate on the division made by Van Wassenhove (2006) by discussing complex emergencies. The issue concerning complex emergencies is that many natural phenomena, like floods, can be worsened by man, making them devastating disasters. Also conflict situations and political circumstances affect disasters, making them more complex and making the work in the humanitarian field more challenging (Koács and Spens, 2009). Also Sheik et. Al. (2000) note that the “the nature of relief work has changes dramatically in the past decade as conflicts have ceased being wars between states and are now largely internal conflicts taking place amid the anarchy of weakened or collapsed states”. 

Roberts (2005, p. 17) points out that there is a link between having a basic understanding about the risks involved with the work in a conflict environment and basic risk reduction. He highlights the workers personal responsibility to guard their safety and security. The judgment of which actions are to avoid is in the hands of the humanitarian worker, when he/she is acting in the field. The worker should therefore try to gain information, use common-sense judgment and try to do basic forecasting on the basis of the given information. Roberts (2005, p. 18) therefore conclude that the security of individuals as well as the organization depends on: the individual behavior of workers, the workers’ ability to listen and the organizations ability of information exchange. (Roberts, 2005 pp. 17-19)

The humanitarian space has the basis in the humanitarian principles of “humanity, neutrality and impartiality”. The essential message in this is that the organizations operating in the humanitarian filed “will not influence the outcome of a conflict with their interventions; and will not favor one group for beneficiaries over another”. The space refers to both the need of the humanitarian workers to do their job efficiently, without interference. (Van Wassenhove, 2006)
Larson (2011) discusses the concept of the “humanitarian space” and how the loss of it can cause security threats, since the humanitarian workers might become targets. For example in the US-led invasion of Iraq, the local defendants didn’t distinguish between the military and the humanitarian workers, which lead to them becoming targets. This is a severe security threat, since the military is increasingly participating in humanitarian operations, distributing relief items and working to provide security to the local community. This “loss of humanitarian space” threats the humanitarian workers, especially in “humilitarian” relationships where humanitarian organizations work together with the military. (Larson, 2011) 
2.2. Different levels of security threats
In humanitarian operations banditry and crime can also occur in many different situations, when people in need or people who want to take advantage of the situation steal or otherwise try to get their hands on for example relief items (Roberts, 2005). Mäntyvaara (2011) mentions that for example the Red Cross strives to reduce the risks of theft and security threats related to this by for example employing local security companies or local people as security personnel. Other security threats that humanitarian workers face in the field are straight forward accidents (Sheik et. al 2000). 

Ill-health don’t affect the immediate security of humanitarian workers, unless an illness although illness is a direct threat to human life. The most common illnesses amongst humanitarian workers are malaria, diarrhea and other blood-borne diseases such as hepatitis and HIV. (Roberts, 2005).  
	
Deaths are the worst threat to humanitarian workers. Sheik et. al. (2000) have in their study concluded the following main causes of death among humanitarian workers: international violence, unintended violence, and motor vehicle accidents. Here it is also important to note that “humans with weapons rather than motor vehicles pose the greatest threat” (Sheik et. al. 2000) One third of all deaths among humanitarian workers happened during the first 90 days of their service, and seventeen percent of these were during the first 30 days of service. (Sheik et. al. 2000). This is essential information since many humanitarian organizations have their delegates or voluntary workers working in 90 days shifts (Mäntyvaara, 2011). 

2.3. The human security paradigm
Human security is a paradigm that focuses on a more human-centered view in security issues related to international relations (IR) and Thomas and Tow (2002) argue that the concept of human security could be used as an instrument in solving issues related to IR.  This is because human security issues do not generate from one single source such as a pandemic, a military conflict or an environmental disaster, but the factors leading to situations threatening human security are very complex and derive from several different sources. When dealing with human security threats large scale activities and societal interrelations, such as social and economical reforms in addition to military involvement needs to be considered in restoring human security. (Thomas and Tow, 2002) In human security the interrelation between poverty and violence is acknowledged and different kinds of development policies provide better value in reducing human security threats than do military involvement (Glasius, 2008).
3. Analysis
Human security is interesting as a concept in humanitarian logistics, because it brings in the international aspect of policies and country relations that also affect the humanitarian field. There is a wide range of human security issues that need to be addressed and there are three categories of victims that need special attention: the victims of wars and armed conflicts, “socio-economic disasters,” and natural disasters. (Thomas and Tow, 2002) When looking at this categorization we can see a link to humanitarian logistics, since the humanitarian field is involved in all these kinds of disasters (Figure 1.).  

In the Sheik et. al. (2000) study it is though important to consider that when studying deaths of humanitarian workers, UN peacekeepers have been included in the study. These are of course also actors in the humanitarian filed, but here we can see the line “blurring” in the sense Larson (2011) mentions in “loss of humanitarian space”. Also Glasius (2008) mentions this problem area as present during the tsunami in Indonesian Aceh were “civilian relief workers were skeptical of soldiers’ involvement in humanitarian aid as they did not believe a military role could be combined with relief work”. The notion of human security was also mentioned in the critique against the U.S. intervention in Iraq, because civilians were at risk and there were disruptions of both food and refugee flows (Glasius, 2008). Here there is again a link between human security concerns and humanitarian logistics as also Larson (2011) mentions this “lost humanitarian space” as threatening humanitarian workers security. So the security risks in humanitarian logistics seem to be connected to general patterns of human security.                                                                                                       

Roberts (2005) emphasize the importance of common sense and knowledge prior to coming to the conflict site. In addition we can also see that one third of all deaths happened during the first 90 days that the humanitarian worker is in the field (Sheik et. al. 2000). This argues for the statement of Roberts (2005) that experience and common sense is to be used in the field. It could also be argued that the feedback and experience of workers who have been in the field should be better taken into the loop of evaluation in humanitarian organizations, so that essential information would not be lost. 

As mentioned earlier, the aim of humanitarian logistics is to provide beneficiaries in need with the immediate relief in different kinds of disasters. In this relief work the final aim will always be capacity building, so that the community has better conditions to tackle any kind of disasters in the future. (Kovács and Spens, 2007).  “Human security requires human development” as Glasius (2008) states and here humanitarian logistics plays a crucial role in bringing in the first contributions to degelopment in a crisis situation. The same kind of threats, like climate change and global terrorism, that Kovács and Spens (2009) see as challenges to humanitarian logistics are mentioned by Glasius (2008) as issues in human security. So therefore it is possible to distinguish a connection between general human security threats and threats and challenges faced by humanitarians in the field. There is also a close connection in terms of the complexities Kovács and Spens (2009) mentions, since it derives from man-made intervention that makes disputes and disasters more difficult to handle. 

When it then comes to the more practical issues concerning security threats of humanitarian workers Sheik et. al. (2000) mentions the importance of giving the humanitarian workers rest and time away from their job, in order to prevent accidents. This goes in line with the notion of Roberts (2005) who conclude that both the individual worker and the organization are responsible for the security of a humanitarian worker. 
4. Discussion and conclusions
When discussing humanitarian logistics and security threats, the complexity of disasters has to be considered as well as the linkages to the context of the emergencies at a whole. As I have presented in this study, there seems to be a connection between the complexity of human security and humanitarian operations, since they both derive from the same kinds of global issues. 

There are several aspects of security. The responsibility of the worker and the organization he/she works for, the disaster type, the information he/she has and the role he/she is seen in. Therefore the more general pattern for security threats seems to be the complexity of the context, causing security threats. The most common security issues seems to be banditry and theft, severe diseases, accidents, and  a death risk deriving from military conflict. The risk of these all can be decreased by internal information flow and personal responsibility and use of common sense (Roberts, 2005). But from a more general perspective of human security, the security threats caused by complex emergencies, is very hard to eliminate. 

This study is limited, because it is done only as a literature study and the literature in the field of humanitarian logistics field, is, as previously mentioned, scarce. The study draws conclusions on a very general level, not going into detail considering different disaster types. It could also be useful to study the different disaster types per se to see at the disaster-specific risks and challenges. A study like this could though be limited by the intertwined character of the field. To get a more holistic picture, there would be a need for a wide empirical study with cross-analysis of different cases of humanitarian operations.

There are certainly many questions for further research to address. As mentioned, comparative case studies could be conducted for deeper analysis of security threats. In addition to this the preventive work linked to security should also be studied, as to see the real causes of security threats. This kind of cause-effect analysis could be used to reduce risks in the future. When discussing humanitarian logistics, the whole process throughout the supply chain could be analyzed, taking preventive actions into consideration. 

The general conclusion of this study is that there seem to be a connection between globalization, more complex security concerns in conflicts and disasters which leads to a more complex issue of security in the humanitarian field as well. Still the issue needs further research in order to get a better understanding of the concept of security in humanitarian logistics.
