

What factors and motives influence devoted wine consumers’ purchase behavior?


2. Introduction

During the past decade, the consumption of wine has increased by approximately 2%in Finland annually. According to Alko’s statistics, over 90 % of the red and white wine purchased in 2010 cost less than 10 euros per bottle and surprisingly over 50 % less than 7 euros. Nearly 70% of all wine bottles available in Alko’s shelves are priced over 10 Euros. It is clear that the demand and supply do not match. This study concentrated on facts which could improve the marketing of quality wine and increase consumers’ interest towards them. This was achieved by identifying what factors and motives influence devoted wine consumers’ purchase behavior. 

Previous research has shown that consumers’ interesttowards, knowledgeof, and experienceofthe wine play a critical role in the decision-making process. For this reason, consumers can be assigned to two groups based on their enthusiasm: consumers who are highly involved with wine, devoted wine enthusiasts and those that are not. Consumers’ level of wine enthusiasm, therefore, shows different factors and motives behind the decision-making process (Lockshin, 2003; Yan, So &Chakravarty, 2005).


In recent years, researchers have become increasingly interested in the influence of the wine packaging, emerging trends such as organic wine, as well as in motivational factors e.g. nationality, culture, age, or gender in the process ofselecting a bottle of wine.Additionally, the knowledge of wine consumers with low involvement has offered valuable insight into the attributes ofthe purchasebehavior (Barber, Ismail & Dodd, 2008). However, there is a clear need to increase in-depth understanding and knowledge of devoted wine consumers’ motives and factors.
Wine differs from traditional consumer goods due to the fact that its quality cannot be judged until it has been consumed.This requires eitherthe use of a variety of information sources, prior knowledge, and preferences (Dodd, Laverie,Wilcox &Dohan, 2005),or factors that happen during the actual purchase event such as offers, description of wine’s characteristics, or appearance of the wine bottle. This study advancesthe knowledge by introducing a new model-based theory of devoted consumers’ purchase processes and interrelationships between the studied factors and motives.
3. Literature Review

In this chapter relevant concepts, such as product involvement, perceived quality, and consumer knowledge, are discussed.

3.1. Product involvement

Several studies (Lockshin, 2003; Yan, So &Chakravarty, 2005; Dodd, Pinkleton and Gustafson, 1996)) indicate that wine consumers can be segmented according to their level of involvement to low-involvement and high-involvement wine consumers. Zaichkowsky (1985: 342) defines involvement as a person’s relevance of the consumption. The relevance can be further divided into product involvement and purchase decision involvement (Charters and Pettigrew, 2006). This study concentrates on high-involvement wine consumers who can also be described as devoted wine enthusiasts. The study of Dodd et al. (1996) identified four features that characterize high-involvement wine consumers: firstly, they use larger number of information sources to educate themselves. Secondly, they use information sources as a media to form opinions. Thirdly, high-involvement wine consumers are more knowledgeable regarding features of wine such as grapes or country of origin. 



Finally, their behavior shows more variety-seeking behaviorthan low-involvement consumers which means that they are more innovative and open-minded when trying new products and use their knowledge and information sources to determine which brands, wine areas, or product types are of most interest for them.
3.2. Perceived quality

The research problem of this study is to examine factors which could improve the marketing of quality wines and increase consumers’ interest towards them. Therefore, it is important to understand how the consumers perceive the quality of wine, how they evaluate it, and how the consumers’ level of involvement influence the evaluation. 

According to Charters and Pettigrew (2006) there is a clear connection between the perceived wine quality and the wine consumers’ level of interest and involvement. In addition to that their results indicated that higher-involvement wine consumers perceive quality as objective, whereas low-involvement consumers conceptualize it as subjective. This means that subjectivity correlates to person’s own experiences and views while objectivity is measured by broader knowledge of wine and external norms. Because quality can be viewed from very different perspectives depending on the individual, researchers have used correlates of quality (Garvin, 1984) in order to define related factors and motives to identify the meaning of quality. The broader knowledge of wines enables high-involvement wine consumers to use more cognitive correlates to describe quality such as complexity while low-involvement wine consumers appear to use more sensory dimensions such as smoothness (Charters and Pettigrew, 2006). Furthermore, low-involvement consumers tend to use price as indicator of quality while high-involvement consumers see quality relative to situation (Charters and Pettigrew, 2006).

3.3. Consumer knowledge

Researchers have found that wine education and improved knowledge of wines increase consumers’ interest towards them and how important they consider wine products to be (Taylor, Dodd and Barber, 2009; Park and Moon, 2003; Brucks, 1985; Barber, 2008). Therefore, wine education is considered to be one of the key factors when low-involvement consumers gradually turn into high-involvement wine enthusiasts. From marketers point of view this kind of development is desirable because high-involvement wine consumers tend to purchase larger quantities, higher priced products, and the variety of products purchased is greater (Charters and Pettigrew, 2006). 

Knowledge of wines has a positive effect on consumers’ confidence in wine purchase decision-making process and increases their experimentation of new brands and product types. According to Park and Moon (2003) products can be categorized into two product types: function and performance. Functionality refers to utilitarian value while performance correlates with pleasure and hedonic value (Taylor et al., 2009). Both values are considered when consumers’ evaluate the quality. 

Abstract concepts such as quality and value of products bear different meanings to people. Therefore, they are difficult to measure. However, quality and value are interrelated and the same dimensions of subjectivity and objectivity apply to both value and quality. One can further argue that all knowledge of consumers is subject and related to their experiences in some way or another. Yet, objectivity is increased at the same time with the knowledge. Furthermore, the knowledge of wine and consumers’ value perception impact on wine preferences and appreciation of wine (Taylor et al., 2009). 

4. Method

This chapter focuses on the methods of the study. The methodology, data collection and analysis are presented. Thus, the trustworthiness of data is discussed.
4.1. Methodology

Wine consumer behavior has been studied from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives depending on the aim. Quantitative methods aim at verification of hypothesis and generalization of the results (Hair et al., 2010); whereas the purpose of qualitative studies is to gain in-depth understanding from smaller samples (Patton, 2002). Qualitative research was selected as the method of this study in order to gain deeper understanding of devoted wine consumer purchase behavior and to discover underlying factors and motives which have an impact on their decision-making. The choice of qualitative approach will add to previous knowledge by discovering new categories and their interrelationships. Furthermore, the use of qualitative triangulation, including the combination of observation and interview, was selected in order to study why and how consumers act in a certain way. The triangulation was also used to increase the validity and reliability of the study. The research approach can be described asabductive because the previous theories of wine consumer purchase behavior was utilized as a pre-understanding when formulating the observation and interview guides and also analyzed simultaneously with the emerged results of this study. 

4.2. Sampling

The target population of the study included high-involvement wine consumers who can be described to have enthusiastic relationship with the wine. Therefore, the study utilizedAlko Etiquette Wine Club’s member register as the basis for the sample selection. The sample was chosen randomly so that all individuals had an equal chance of selection (Hirvonen, 2011). 

The homogeneous sampling was chosen as the sampling strategy of the study in order to study and describe the segment of high-involvement wine consumers in-depth (Patton, 2002). The sample size includedone informant who was studied in-depth and the results gained from him answered to the purpose of the study. The sample details are described in the table 1.

[Table]
4.3. Data collection

The data collection included two phases: firstly, to monitor the informant through observation when he did wine shopping in naturally occurring situation.The event took place in Alko, in the mall of IsoOmena. The purpose of the observation was to monitor consumer’s behaviour, processes, and patterns when he purchased wine and to increase pre-understanding before the second phase. Secondly, the same informant was interviewed one week laterwith the use of structured interview strategy (general interview guide approach). This particular interview technique was selected in order to secure all relevant data in relation to the aim, to make the data collection more systematic, and to enable probing (Silverman, 2006:110). The interview method was chosen to find out informant’s opinions, thoughts, intentions, and feelings which cannot be gained through observation (Patton, 2002: chapter 7).


Besides structured interview strategy, the narrative approach was used at the end of the interview. The informant was asked to tell a story about the observed shopping event in his own words by the help of auto-memoing technique (Spiggle, 1994) in which the informant was able to look at pictures of himself in order to trace back the feelings and thoughts.

The data from the observation was collected with the help of observation guide. Additionally, the researcher took several photos and made field notes. The interview was recorded and transcribed which enabled iteration and increased trustworthiness of the data. Observation and interview guides were based on the studies of Barber et al. (2008); Dodd et al. (1996); Charters and Pettigrew (2006).

The interviews included following themes:

1. Meaning of wine: definition & description
2. Consumption situation: when & with whom
3. Purchase behavior: where
4. Purchase motives and factors: who & how
5. Preferences
6. Questions about the observation: narrative & auto-memoing technique
Hirvonen (2011)
4.4 Data analysis


The raw data was analyzed simultaneously with the data collection which increased the quality, adjusted the aim of the study, and enabled iteration as a part of the data analysis. The collected data was then analyzed in four stages based on theories of Miles and Huberman, (1994); Spiggle (1994), and Silverman (2004:153). The process of data analysis started by understanding and organizing the data and followed by analysis of the conclusions, and verification of the results. The process of data analysis is illustrated in the figure 1.


[Figure]
The first three stages of the analysis process were interpreted and examined according to five techniques introduced bySpiggle (1994): abstraction, categorization, dimensionalizion, integration, and iteration. The results confirmed in the early phase that the consumers’decision-making can be divided into spontaneous and pre-determined purchase behavior (abstraction). Categorization process revealed five main factors and motives which influence devoted wine consumers’ purchase behavior. Dimensionalization identified three dimensions: balance between trying new and buying favorites, planning or no planning, and consumed at home or outside home. Axial coding (integration) defined two new concepts: food & wine and enjoyment. Iteration between the observation and interview was performed as a continuous process.
6.1. Trustworthiness of data

The trustworthiness of data was evaluated based on the theoretical frameworks of Lincoln and Guba (1985), Wallendorf& Belk (1989),and Miles &Huberman (1994). The assessment criteria included pre-understanding, credibility, transferability, dependability, confirmability, integrity, and utilization (see table 2). Limitations of the quality will be discussed at the end of this chapter.

[Table]

The limitations of the study are now discussed. The researcher is a member of Alko Etiquette Wine Club which can either be seen as increased pre-understanding or bias. The low number of respondents can also be seen as limitation of the study since higher number of respondents would have increased the validity and reliability of the study. Increased number of informants, prolonged engagement, and several observations with the informant would also have increased the variability of the findings. 
7. Analysis

In this section the analysis of observation and interview are discussed and reported. 

7.1. Analysis of observation

Theinformant used a wine shopping list and tried to find the wines in the list by wandering back and forth between the shelves. He picked bottles one at a time and examined themcarefully by reading the product labels and Alko’s descriptions in the shelves before putting them into the shopping basket. However, he did not buy all the listed items but refused to buy some of the listed products. Instead he picked substituting products spontaneously. 

[Picture]	

The informant interacted with the sales person when he searched for two items and asked sales person’s opinion about the wines. The communication between the sales person and the informant was fluent and friendly. The interaction with the sales personnel indicated that Alko’s personnel can be viewed as one information source that can influence informant’s purchase behavior. The informant concentrated on examining mostly wines but he also bought a vacuum pump and special edition beers. The later examination of the bought bottles showed concentration on red wines (4 of 6) and wines from Italy (3 of 6). Half of the products were from the New World and half from Europe. The average price per bottle was around 10 euros.

7.2. Analysis of interview

The interview confirmed the findings from the observation. The informant said that he uses prior shopping list approximately half of the times and relies on favorite brands or shops otherwise spontaneously the other half. According to him spontaneous shopping is influenced by Alko’s appealing wine descriptions from which he looks for meaningful “magic words” and novelties from familiar producers, favorite areas, or grapes. He also stated that besides his own experiences, thewine knowledge has an effect on his spontaneous shopping.  

The respondent listed wine literature, magazines, tastings, Alko and its personnel, wine clubs, friends and family, own experiences, internet, restaurants, as well as wineries and special wine shops abroad as information sources which influence his purchase behavior. The purchase location played a major roll to the respondent. He divided the purchase locations into Finland and abroad when travelling. He characterized Alko to either “Convenience Alko” which has a convenient location or to “Service Alko” which has better wine selection and more knowledgeable personnel. Abroad he buys wine from the airports, ferries, straight from the wineries, or from specialized wine shops.

The respondent said that both the occasion when the wine is consumed and with whom the wine is consumed has a major effect on the choice of wine. He consumes wine home with food or as an enjoyment. Occasions when the wine is consumed outside included work-related happenings, gatherings with friends, or eating at restaurants. Furthermore, he consumes wine with his family members, friends, and people from work, and sometimes alone.  At the end he said that there are some factors which hinder him from particular purchase behavior. He would like order directly from Alko’s separate ordering system (minimum order quantity is 6 bottles per item), straight from wineries or wine shops abroad if he had space to storage them properly or if the quantities were smaller.

8. Results and discussion

This study concentrated on facts which could improve the marketing of quality wines and increase consumers’ interest towards them. That was achieved by identifying what factors and motives influence devoted wine consumers’ purchase behavior. In this section, the results are reported and discussed. 

Wine enthusiasts consider wine as enjoyment, source of relaxation, and gastronomical experience to which they relate positive images such as travelling, social life, and leisure time.Therefore, it is suggested that the use of these positive images could be seen beneficiary in marketing of quality wines.Furthermore, the quality of wine was described as balanced, sophisticated, rich in flavors, or innovative. The price was not considered as the indicator of quality as such, like for low-involvement wine consumers, but was rather described to be in par with the taste. However, it was also mentioned that higher price means usually higher quality. 


The results showed that the decision-making process has two levels: Firstly, the wine purchase behavior can be divided into either spontaneous or pre-determined. Secondly, the study indicated that the next level includes five categories: purchase location, information sources, occasion when the wine is consumed, with whom the wine is consumed, and hindering factors which can be turned into future possibilities (see table 3).The study suggests that the marketing of quality wines can benefit from discovering marketing possibilities in these categories of factors and motives. The results discovered the importance of information sources which can also be confirmed by earlier studies (see for example Dodd et al, 1996; Taylor et al, 2009) how developing consumers’ knowledge through wine education or the use of external information sources can turn low-involvement wine consumers to high-involvement enthusiasts. In this way the variety of purchased wines increases and the price-range expands which then results in the increase of quality wines. Therefore, special attention is suggested to be paid to the utilization of information sources.

[Table]
