

 ”Leaders are born not made”

Introduction
The age old saying of being “born a leader” is commonly used without giving the ramifications of it  much thought. One of the unspoken assumptions is that the person was not made a leader, but rather  he had the qualities of a leader already when born, or rather; “leaders are born, not made”. This, of course, is quite a controversial statement, as if this were true, courses such as “leadership” would not be necessary at all. This approach is actually one of the first attempts to systematically study leadership, called the “great man” theories. These studies focused on studying great leaders such as Thomas Jefferson or Mohandas Ghandi and finding innate qualities and characteristics that they possessed (Northouse, 15). Meaning that the studies were focusing on the person itself and his biological personality traits that were inherited, i.e. he/she was born with them. It is important to define “born”, because though a person is born with these traits it is still necessary to develop them with upbringing and education. The traits, skills and style approach will be used to try and clarify wether or not leadership is hereditary. 

Traits Approach
Firstly, in examining this statement, a historical perspective to the traits studies is useful, as I would assume, many people still operate under the pretense that great leaders are simply born. Although there is some truth to this belief, a more complete picture is necessary to explain the flaws behind this reckoning. The great man theory mentioned above, concentrated on identifying specific traits that clearly differentiated leaders from followers (Bass, 1990; Jago 1982, cited in Northouse 2007). However in the mid-1900s, Stogdill suggested that no one set of traits were consistent when a variety of situations were taken into account. Stogdill summarised the different studies and surmised that the traits that comprise the difference between leaders and subordinates are: intelligence, alertness, insight, responsibility, initiative, persistence, self-confidence, and sociability. The most important point was that individuals do not simply become leaders because they possess the traits, it is a specific situation that is relevant to these traits that makes a leader (Northouse, 2007). As we are talking about historical studies, of course the big question of gender pops up, especially as the traditional leader is seen as a male figure. In Mann's (Mann, 1959, cited in Northouse 2007) findings he stated that characteristics such as masculinity, and dominance were one of the traits that were found in leaders. Which was probably more than true at this point in time. Mann even points out that conservatism was one of the important traits in leaders, which is quite humorous when comparing to todays requirements for leaders. Even Lord. et. al. States that one of the leader traits is masculinity as late as 1986. This research was mostly based on the fact that leaders are born with these traits and that these same traits are necessary to become a leader. 

In 1991 the traits approach was fine-tuned by Kirkpatrick and Locke (1991, cited in Northouse 2007) who stated that leaders differ from their counterparts in six traits; drive, desire to lead, honesty and integrity, self-confidence, cognitive ability, and knowledge of the business. This in itself is not so revolutionary, however they stated that individuals can be born with them or learn them or both. As such the term traits, which has historically been used to imply genetic traits, also means ones which have been learned. The traits theory has over a hundred years of research to back it up, yet the traits it has produced are still not consistent with each other and sometimes arbitrary, and many still believe in traits as being built in, and not learnable. 

Emotional Intelligence
Secondly, being born a leader, does not really hold up against tough inspection, as the next case of emotional intelligence comes into play. Emotional intelligence being all the rage lately in the corporate world and something which one definitely can't be born with. Emotional intelligence, as the name suggests, has to do with the emotional part of the thinking process rather than the cognitive one (Northouse, 2007). It is the EQ (Emotional quota) rather than the IQ (intelligence quota). The fact that, leaders must be able to understand and have empathy towards their subordinates in order to foster a working relationship. The ability to effectively manage ones own emotions and emotions in relationship to others is paramount to being a “good” leader. 

In a paper written by Cary Cherniss on emotional intelligence, she quotes many researches that show the importance of EQ in relation to IQ. For example the Somerville study followed 450 boys over a 40 year phase and concluded that IQ had little to no relation in the success of their lives.  The biggest differences were childhood abilities such as being able to handle frustration, control emotions, and get along with people (Cherniss, 2000). These sound like very basic abilities, which in essence they are, but the point being that the ability to master these emotions is anything but child's play. These abilities are ones which have to,  by definition, be honed as a child and are a vital part of growing up. No child that has been brought up by a lax and uncaring parent can naturally inhibit and control its emotions, it is the teaching a loving of a caring parent that nurtures a child to be emotionally balanced. Rather than being overly intelligent, the qualities of being able to persist in the face of difficulty and get along with e.g. colleagues is more important for success (Cherniss, 2000). A further study showed that most effective leaders in the US Navy were warmer, emotionally expressive, dramatic and sociable, in other words had high EQs.  In other words EQ is not something that one is born with and the fact that it is so important to leaders points to the fact that leaders can definitely, and are definitely being “made” all the time. 

Skills Approach
The Third approach utilized in this essay is the Skills approach. As opposed to the traits theory, the skills theory is based on the skills and abilities of a leader that can be learned and developed. It goes without saying that simply the fact that there is a whole approach on learning leadership skills obviously points to the fact that leaders are not simply born. The skills approach states that although the personality traits are important, knowledge and actual ability are necessary for effective leadership (Northouse, 2007). The limited and narrow view of leadership we were presented in the traits view is broadened up by the skills approach. Instead of focusing solely on definitive traits, the idea was to determine developable skills. The three-skills approach as it is known from the research of Robert Katz, argued that the traits approach is what leaders are, and the skills approach is what they can accomplish (Northouse, 2007). So is a person is capable of learning from their experiences they are capable of acquiring leadership. Meaning that we come to the approach where leadership is made and not inherited. Katz' approach was fine tuned into the modern and empirical skills theory known today. 

This modern theory states that at the heart of the skills model is “competencies”. Which is further divided into Problem-solving skills, social judgement skills, and knowledge. These subheadings will be analyzed with reference to the question of being born a leader. Problem-solving skills are defined as a leaders creative ability to solve ill-defined organizational problems (Northouse, 2007). It may well be that some people are born with traits that if properly nurtured lead to developed problem-solving skills, however it is exactly the upbringing and education that perfect this skill. Social Judgment skills relate directly to emotional intelligence which can be read about above. 

The third aspect is knowledge, which adds a bit of both “born” and “made” into the analysis. Part of knowledge is the accumulation of information over a period of time, every leader needs to know the ins and outs of their specific task(Northouse, 2007). This represent the part of leaders being “made”. However, the other part of knowledge is the storing and organizing of this information into mental structures called schema. As information is stored and organized it becomes more meaningful and knowledge is created (Northouse 2007). These complex brain functions are something that some people are born with and although much can be developed and learned upon, this constitutes a skill which a person can and is born with. This ties in with the attribute of general cognitive ability (GCA) which is listed under the individual aspects of the skills model. In this section Northouse (2007:48) goes as far as saying that “general cognitive ability is linked to biology, not to experience.” GCA is described as core intelligence, something the brain is born with and grows and expands during early adulthood and declines with age. GCA is of the utmost importance in problem-solving and knowledge and is therefore important for leadership. Essentially, something one is biologically born with. 

Motivation is the last attribute in this approach. Without being motivated there is no leadership. A leader has to firstly, be willing to lead to even be able to. Leaders must want to exert their influences and be committed to the social good of the organization in question (Northouse, 2007). Motivation is a tough attribute to classify into wether it is a biological trait or something that is learned. According to one study, academic motivation is directly related to parenting practices and the quality of the home environment (Luster, Lekskul, Oh, 2004). Academic motivation being important of course to develop other attributes such as knowledge or cognitive ability, even though we are referring to motivation in general. So it seems as if this important leadership characteristic is something which is learned during adolescence. 

Style Approach
Lastly, the approach that will be analyzed here is the style approach, which emphasizes the behavior of the leader. The style approach is based on two different kinds of leadership behaviors task and relationship behaviors (Northouse, 2007). The style approach sets out to explain how leaders combine these two approaches to create effective leading. This is an interesting approach to end this essay with as it aims to understand what types of behaviors leaders are prone to.  As we have now seen the different personal traits of leadership can be either “born with” or developed. Some of these styles will now be analyzed to determine what sort of traits they require, and wether good leaders can only be someone who has simply been taught leadership.

 The style approach is popularly portrayed with the leadership grid where different styles are given two sets of point from 1-9. e.g. Authority compliance: (9,1). In this style there is not much communication with subordinates except to relay instructions, the leader is very over-powering (Northouse, 2007). This would be a very simple leadership style, one which do not require many hereditary traits, and can be quite easily developed. A stern style of leadership that is overtly conservative. Not a great style of leadership, but still a style that most people could learn. 

The country club style of leading scores the same amount (1,9) but on the other side of the scale. This style requires a lot of EQ, where everyone is made to feel as comfortable as possible with a positive and uncontroversial climate. This is again not something one is born with, but depends on the upbringing and parenting that the person has experienced. A neglected child will probably have a skewered emotional intelligence.

Lastly the “team management style” of leading (9,9) is one where a high priority is set both on the tasks and the interpersonal relationships (Northouse, 2007). This is where cognitive prowess comes into play. Without the ability to use the knowledge in a way where tasks and relationships can be balanced, it is not possible to reach this level of leadership. This is the highest scoring leadership style and therefore also the best. This requires the “born with” ability of high general cognitive ability. 

Conclusion

In conclusion, the ability to be a leader and a “good” one at that depends on many factors. Wether these factors are something one is born with or not is up for debate. Most of the factors analyzed herein point to the fact that one is not born with the necessary characteristics, but that they are attained later in life. However, as the last example points out general cognitive ability stands out as a trait which is strictly hereditary. It is the basic framework and capacity of the brain. Although people will have to develop this ability to make it usable, it is a slight advantage. We are however reminded that for this ability to actually exhibit and edge would mean that all other leadership abilities are on par, which is highly unlikely. Overall, there are definitely traits that help in becoming a well-balanced leader. Ultimately these traits are all moot unless they are harnessed by caring parents and a balanced upbringing and education. Leaders are made, not born.

