Deregulation of the Swedish pharmacy monopole
Introduction

Because of the safety concerns the pharmacy sector has always been a target for regulations of different kind.  In many cases the government has been playing a major role in this regulation. One of the most extreme cases could previously be found in Sweden. Up until 2010 the whole pharmaceutical trade was totally controlled by the Swedish government. During the year of 2010 the monopoly was abolished and anyone (meeting certain legal requirements) could start selling pharmaceuticals in Sweden. 

The deregulation of a state run monopoly is an interesting phenomenon in itself, as an empty field is colonized by new actors. But for countries like Finland, with a strictly regulated pharmaceutical, market the process is of special interest as the future decisions in this area might be much dependent on the consequences of the event in Sweden. The Finnish and Swedish societies are very similar and therefore relatively easy to compare.

The reasons for the deregulation laid in making the pharmaceutical market more consumer-friendly. The inability to adapt to customer needs was one of the main reasons for the deregulation process, which was pointed out in the research carried out prior to initiating the process (Swedish government, 2007). 

One year after the actual deregulation the first figures indicating the results of the process are starting to show. Although it is still very early to draw final conclusions of the whole process, an early analysis could give indications on the success of this major change. The consumers and their situation are especially interesting at this point, as they were pointed out as the main reason for the change.

Even if some of the problems found in the research, done prior to the deregulation, can be addressed by opening the market to new actors, there is still areas that might not improve. Sweden is a big country with long distances. Have the improvements affected all pharmacy customers equally and have the problems indentified actually improved?

In order to study these questions a SWOT-analysis is made comparing the situation prior to the deregulation to the current situation, based on figures published by the pharmacy sector and focusing on the problems identified in the evaluation studies done prior to the deregulation.  A SWOT-analysis reviews the market based on its strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats and can be used to analyze larger entireties (**citation needed**).

This paper is divided into three main sections; A short introduction to the deregulation process of the pharmacy market in Sweden; A SWOT-analysis of the consumers situation before and after the abolishment of the monopoly; general conclusions of the situation right now and a picture of what further changes the future might bring to this area. In addition to this the impact these events could have on the Finnish market will also be discussed.
Background

Background on when/why the monopoly was formed and why it was abolished
Consumer demand on the pharmacy market

According to a study conducted by the Swedish Consumers Agency during the spring of 2008 (before the deregulation process begun) showed that most people were relatively happy with the pharmacy system in place at the time. The overall rating given by the customers in the study was 4,4 on a scale from 1-5. The study also showed that most people had less than 15 minutes to their closest (konsumentv. 2008)
In research med on the pharmacy customer demands one of the things the pharmacy customers valued the most was that the personnel in pharmacies had proper education and knowledge about the medicines. Another thing that was highly valued was the availability of medicines, i.e. not having to wait more than 24 hours before getting the right medication (konsumentv 2009).
Prices on the medicines was another issue which concerned many of the customers
Additional services.
(konsumentv 2009)
Methods

In order to analyze the changes that the Swedish pharmacy market has under gone, a SWOT-analysis is conducted. The SWOT-analysis is well suited for this study as the method can be applied on bigger wholes such as the entire pharmacy market, rather than just one single company and its situation on the market. The method is especially well suited for finding areas of improvement and therefore it is well suited for this particular case (Armstrong M).
Validity and reliability

This analysis is based on figures and information gathered by and from the actor on the pharmacy market in Sweden. Prior to 2010 the data has been collected by the state-run Apoteket Ab, the owner of all pharmacies at that time and contains information from all of the company’s retail locations.  After the deregulation the data has been gathered by the Swedish Pharmacy Association (Sveriges apoteksförening), an umbrella association for all pharmacies in Sweden. This data does also cover all pharmacies in Sweden, which means that the data from both sources should be comparable even though the actors on the market have changed.
 Because the party gathering the information is at the same time an actor or an organization working for the actors on the market, the reliability of the fact could be argued. But as this study focuses on notifying changes in the customers’ situation this should not interfere with the results. In addition to this data gathered by the neutral party the Swedish Consumers Agency (konsumentverket), covering the pharmacy deregulation, is also reviewed in order to increase the reliability.
As indicated by literature the SWOT analysis is a valid method for analyzing markets and detecting areas In need of improvements. Because of the limitations on the extent of this study no other methods for analysis are used.

SWOT-analysis

The SWOT-anlysis is a method of structuring a study on a larger field. The aim is to identify internal affecting the situation at present (strengths, weaknesses) and external (opportunities, threats) that affect the studied object now or in the future.  (Armstrong)
The when conducting a SWOT analysis, the features of the object of study are separated into four categories: strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. By doing this, the most interesting areas should be emphasized. That is, areas in need of improvement or areas that have affected the customer´s situation negatively as well as the areas where the customers are satisfied and where the situation has improved since the deregulation.

Analysis

Strengths
 
The most significant change for the better has been in the area of opening hours. AS prior data shows that only a small number of pharmacies were open in the weekends and after 6 pm on weekdays (AAB). Now the situation is significantly better in this area. (apo för 2011) 
number of pharmacies-job opportunities
Weaknesses

safety of non-prescription medicine
waiting times
no decrease in prices
The network of paharmacies built up by Apoteket Ab was planned in order to make the services available to everyone regardless of the area they lived in. In a country like Sweden where distances are long and the population unevenly spread this can cause challenges. However, as the results of studies made previously to the deregulation show most people were very happy with their access to pharmacies (konsumentv.).  
After the deregulation the  number of pharmacies have increased drastically, but as probably also could be predicted most of the new pharmacies have been founded in densely built-up areas, mainly in the regions of Stockholm, Gothenburg and Malmö the three major cities of Sweden (apo för). This means that the growth has mainly taken place in the areas where the distances to the pharmacies already where the shortest. In a free market this comes natural as the market grows where the biggest demand is found. It is not profitable to found new pharmacies in areas with only a small population ad where the distances between warehouses and the businesses might be very long. Even if the present situation is not showing an immediate decrease in the level of service outside big cities, the results clearly show that the customers of the country-side are not paid as much attention to as the urban population. 

Opportunities

A tendency that can clearly be noticed is that many of the companies that are developing new pharmacy-chains in Sweden at the moment have some connections to the wholesale industry. Kronans droghandel, one of the biggest chains of pharmacies at the moment with more than 200 pharmacies are owned by Oriola-KD a Finnish wholesale company active in the Nordic and the Baltic region (Oriola-KD). Doc Morris another big chain, consisting of almost 100 newly founded pharmacies, is owned by the big German wholesale company Celesio AG (Doc Morris). This kind of integration can lead to synergy effects that could benefit both the companies and the customers. 
These companies have the possibility to create a more efficient supply chain compared to other competitors, which can create a competitive edge. For the customers the companies have better possibilities to produce additional services such as electronic prescription systems or additional healthcare services. Smaller companies might not have the resources to develop or even offer similar services. One of the things Apoteket Ab was criticized for was that they did not develop their service, rather only continued to maintain the same services they always had provided. 
Threats

The Indirect cost-higher cost for customer 
big changes ahead – personnel (educated and non-educated)
competition
Conclusions and discussion on applicability to Finland 

It is still very early to draw any final conclusions about all of the consequences of the deregulation in Sweden. A process like this will probably take years before the situation becomes stable, but some changes can already be discussed. During the last couple of years the end-customer has unquestionably noticed lots of changes in the pharmacy market directly affecting the customer directly. The most noticeable is probably the amount of different service providers. At the end of 2010 there were 20 different companies selling prescription drugs to the public, compared to one (Apoteket Ab) prior to the deregulation. *****
The areas that have improved the most were actually not considered very big problems prior to the deregulation.  Availability of the pharmacies seems to have increased marginally
The areas that were actually valued more, such as competence of the staff and availability of medicines seem to actually have worsened after the deregulation. This might be a partially caused by the process of change, where lots of staff changes employers and new enterprises are built up and still struggling to get their processes running smoothly. But it is remarkable to observe that the features valued by the customers are actually the ones that have improved the least.
Keeping in mind that the process of change is still under way it is still important to keep in mind the possibilities this change also can provide. With experiences from other countries the bigger chains can provide new services that help the customers and possibly the whole healthcare system. But if this actually will be the case remains to be seen.
If the Swedish situation is compared to the Finnish there is both similarities and distinct differences. In Finland we also have had a strict regulation on the pharmacy, but the community pharmacies have never been run as a state monopoly. The pharmacies in Finland have mostly been owned by private entrepreneurs personally responsible for their own business. The ownership has been limited to one pharmacy per person, and the location of the pharmacy has also been predetermined (apteekkariliitto).
A deregulation in Finland would probably also here generate the growth of a number of bigger chains. Wholesale companies or private investment groups would probably also here be the main actors. The two big food retail corporations, Kesko and Hok-Elanto, could also possibly be interested in expanding their operations to the pharmacy sector. This means that there probably is a commercial interest in opening up the regulations also in Finland.
The situation for the customer is similar in Sweden and Finland. In many areas the population is spread across a large area and the distances to the pharmacy might be long. One big difference is that as we don’t have a state-run company that could cover the areas where the commercial interest is lacking. This could create a worse situation for the Finnish pharmacy customers of the sparsely populated areas than for their Swedish peers.
But on the other hand if the deregulation helps to develop the pharmacy sector towards a more versatile service provider the benefits could be significant. As most of the pharmacies in Finland are small enterprises, the ability and willingness to develop new services is restricted. 
Whether the decision to deregulate the pharmacy market in Sweden was the best solution for the customer or not can, as also this analysis shows, be argued. However a totally state controlled monopoly is not in line with the society advocated by the EU and most other western communities, where competition should be free and driven by demand on the market. In the end competition is usually the driving force for progress and development. And new ideas are certainly needed in order to cope with concerns caused by the ageing population, which is the situation in many Western counties not least the Nordic countries.
