CEO payments in Finland - too much or enough?

   1. Introduction

Executive compensation is a topic that receives a lot of attention and raises debate.
Critics argue that CEOs are greatly overpaid and not paid according to performance.
Furthermore, critics claim that boards are doing a lousy job compensating and
supervising the CEOs (Jensen et al 2004). There is a large literature on CEO payments,
primarily based on US data. Some studies argue that CEOs are overpaid, other studies
e.g. Kaplan (2008) claim the opposite. It is obvious that corporate governance and CEO
compensation are not perfect, but large amounts of data indicate that CEO payments are
determined by market forces (Kaplan and Rauh 2004).

Most of the previous studies are geographically concentrated to the U.S. This research
describes the situation in Finland including the most recent data available. This paper
attempts to analyze the Finnish market and to identify factors which drive CEO
compensation. The topic can be found as a current matter since CEO payments have
lately been a hot topic in the press. E.g. Nordea's Chairman of the Board, Björn
Wahlroos' comments on Nordea's CEO, Christian Clausen's payments have given rise
to an aggressive debate on executive payments, perks and pension plans. Among other
things, Wahlroos stated that he would be more than glad to raise Clausen's
compensations so that Clausen can buy more apartments in Stockholm if he wishes.
This was said simultaneously as Nordea was firing thousands of employees due to its
cost savings plans.

New recommendations on corporate governance for listed companies, is also being
considered in this study. Companies are nowadays increasingly forced to report
management compensation. Some earlier studies on the topic have been limited due to
the fact that companies have restrained in reporting compensations.




                                                                                     
    1.1.   Purpose of the study

The purpose of this paper is to compare CEO payments of Finnish companies with a
minimum current market cap of EUR 100m. Moreover, the paper try to identify what
affects CEO payments in Finland. Own conclusion to the matter whether CEOs in
Finland are overpaid or not will also be given.


    1.2.   Limitations

The research is limited to CEO payments of the Finnish companies with a current
market cap of at least EUR 100m. Financial companies have been excluded because of
differing income statement and balance sheet structure. Voluntary pension
compensations are included in this study.


   2. Separation of ownership and control: Agency problem

The separation of ownership and control is the background of corporate governance and
is closely connected with the agency theory or the agency problem occurring between
management and shareholders. Berle and Means (1932) were the first introducing the
agency theory and many other studies have thereafter confirmed it and explored it
further.

Managers may use their position and power to benefit themselves personally in a variety
of ways. This is referred to the agency problem, a conflict of interest arising between
shareholders and management because of differing goals (Shleifer & Vishny 1997).
Managers may e.g. engage in unprofitable empire building, or may fail in distributing
excess cash in a poor business opportunity environment or may perhaps strengthen their
position so that it can be hard to displace them although the company performs poorly
(Schleifer & Vishny 1989). How can shareholders then be sure that the management is
not expropriating them or simultaneously spending too much money on unnecessary
things instead of maximizing the shareholder value? It's important to address that any
discussion of executive compensation must proceed the bottom-line agency problem
distressing the decision making of management (Bebchuk & Fried 2003).



                                                                                     
  3. Prior research

In this chapter the prior research considering CEO compensation from the Finnish and
the US market will be presented.


   3.1.    Steven N. Kaplan (2008)

Kaplan investigates in his article "Are U.S. Ceo`s really overpaid" the CEO pay for U.S.
listed firms on the S&P 500 during the time-period 1993-2006. The main issue that he
wanted to address with his survey was whether the pay of CEO`s is a largely market
phenomena or if it is driven by the power of the CEO`s and the weakness of companies'
boards.

Kaplan measured CEO pay in two different ways. The first way was measured by that
he looked at ex. ante value of CEO pay. This measure includes the CEO´s; salary, bonus
the value of restricted stocks and the estimated value of the options that was issued that
year. This measure is not what the CEO actually gets paid during a year, it is only a
estimation from the boards sight of view. The second measure of pay is a true fact of
what the CEO earns during a year. It is called realized pay and it is based on the same
variables as the ex. ante way. The only thing that differs is the pay of the options is
calculated through looking at the exercised pay of the options. Kaplan also looked at the
pay development for other highly ­paid talents such as lawyers, hedge-fund managers
and athletes (top- level). Further on, as has been done in previous research he looks at
the relationship between CEO pay and performance.

The survey showed that the CEO pay has declined since year 2000 or been kept
unchanged. In comparison to other sectors with similarly talented individuals has gone
up at least as much since 1994. The survey concludes that high CEO pay is largely a
market phenomenon since Kaplan argues that many other groups have seen their
compensation increase substantially and at the same level as CEOs. The survey also
shows that the realized pay for a CEO is strongly related to the stock performance.




                                                                                        
   3.2.    Mäkinen (2007)

In the discussion paper CEO compensation, firm size and firm performance: evidence
from Finnish panel data the author examined how CEO pay is related to firm size and
to firm performance. The time-period is from 1996-2002 and the data set is Finnish
listed companies. CEO annual compensations were collected from the Finnish tax
authorities. Firm level financial statement was accessed through Balance consulting,
which is a Finnish consulting firm. When measuring firm performance two different
measures were used; one is an accounting based (ROA) and the other one is a stock-
based (returns) measure. The method used to check for the relationship between CEO
pay and firm size is estimated by OLS separate cross-section model and a pooled model.

The study shows that CEO average compensation has increased substantially during the
period of investigation. An interesting finding is the fact that shares with foreign
ownership is positively and statistically significant associated with the level of
compensation. Further concentrated ownership is showed to have a negative impact to
the level of compensation, but only in the pooled model.

When comparing CEOs and industrial workers ratio, the mean total compensation was 7
in 1996, peaked at 24 in 2000 and thereafter dropped down to 13 in 2002. According to
the author this development of CEO pay is strongly related to the market boom on the
Helsinki Stock exchange. In 1999 the ratio was 16 and compared to other studies this
ratio exceeds the results reported from Germany (13), Sweden (13) and France (15). But
when comparing to U.S, they show a ratio of (475) which shows that the European
compensations are quite small.


   3.3.    Vittaniemi (1997)

In the survey "Top executive Compensation and Company performance in Finland" the
author examines CEO compensation both for listed and unlisted companies' Finnish
companies, as a theoretical framework the principal agent problem. The data set consists
of a sample of 500 largest companies ranked based on sales. The final sample included
48 listed companies and 70 private companies. The method that was used was a pooled
regression model.


                                                                                      
The aim of the survey was to examine the relationship between compensation and firm
performance. CEO salary is defined in two different ways. The first does only include
base ­salary while the other is taking performance pay into consideration. To
investigate the financial performance measures the author used key-figures as ROI and
ROA.

The econometric results for the listed companies showed that performance- sensitive
compensation as stock-options, deferred stock ownership and dividends are important to
find a statistically pay for performance relationship. When looking at the financial key ­
figures the study showed that last periods change in ROI1 has a statically significant
effect on total CEO compensation concerning the second measure ROE the author did
not find a significant relationship. Further on the author states that a firms share
performance and size together are the most important determinants of executive
compensation. Concerning private companies the study found that the pay for
performance relationship is much weaker compared to listed companies.


     4. Alternative compensation systems for CEOs

This chapter focuses on what alternatives there are for compensating the CEO. However,
this paper only analyzes the CEO taxable income in the empirical part. As stated earlier
there have been several attempts in the corporate governance literature to construct the
perfect compensation scheme, which would dilute the agency problem occurring
between management and shareholders. The differences in compensation systems
around the world are big and most of the previous studies are done on US data.

The main point is that the total compensation should be competitive and make the CEO
to make decisions that would maximize the wealth of the shareholders. As mentioned,
the compensation system should be structured in the way that the agency problem
between managers and shareholders is diluted. CEO compensation can be constructed of
base salary, bonuses, company shares and options and various fringe benefits.




1
    An increase in ROI with 1% increased CEO compensation with 0,017


                                                                                        
   4.1.    Base salary

Essentially, every CEO has a base salary. The base salary is usually paid every month
and is correlated with the size of the company (Ciscel & Carroll 1980) (Jensen &
Murphy 1990). It is important that the base salary is competitive on the market so that
the company succeeds in attracting highly professional and skilled managers. The
monthly salary functions in a manner that the CEO is committed and focused on his task,
but has also incentive problems. When the CEO's salary is correlated to the firm size,
the manager can try to increase his salary in engaging in unprofitable empire building.
On the other hand one can think that a too big salary can make the manager risk-averse
and thus tries to minimize the company risks to ensure his positions and enjoy his salary.


   4.2.    Performance based salary

To dilute the agency problem between managers and shareholders, many firms have tied
the total compensation to the performance of the firm. Performance based salaries can
include bonuses, options and company shares.

It's quite common that executives receive a part of their compensation in forms of
company shares and options. Share based compensation have increased lately due to
corporate governance recommendations and from the demand of shareholders. In this
way the managers are seen to engage in more long-term planning and consequently
creating sustainable profitability (Geretey, Hoi & Robin 2001). But other studies claim
that e.g. stock options are all too often just extra compensation and not effective
incentives (Stewart III 2000). Likewise, according to Bebchuk and Fried (2003) stock
option plans also fail to filter out stock price rises due to successful managerial job and
company performance and rises that are due to industry and general market trends. The
same argument could be used for bonuses, if the market is blooming; even executives
whose companies perform poorly relative to the industry may earn large profits, because
bonuses are to a large extent tied to accounting numbers.

There are two ways for share based compensation. The manager can either obtain
company shares directly or commit to the company's option scheme. If the manager
obtains directly company shares, there are usually restrictions in when the shares can be


                                                                                         
sold. One can estimate that performance based salary results in managers taking more
risk (but not too much) and become more efficient and concerned about the company
performance, but they also have their pitfalls.


   4.3.    Other compensation

In addition to base salary, and performance based salary, executives also obtain various
fringe benefits from the company. Some examples are a company car, company boat or
even vantage to hunt (Pietarinen, Taloussanoma 2012) These fringe benefits do usually
not have any significant effects regarding corporate governance.

It's important to mention pension benefits and other stealth compensations under this
subtitle. These compensation methods make the total executive pay less transparent and
may not necessarily be connected with the executive's performance. Moreover,
compensations given to executives after they retire do not have to be included in firm's
public compensation tables or calculations. Pension plans or other postponed
compensation is not taken into account in the empirical part of this paper.


   5. Arguments for and against "CEOs are overpaid in Finland"

This chapter will give some arguments for and against why CEOs in Finland would be
overpaid. As a starting point of view it's good to mention that the question itself doesn't
have a correct answer, since it's all about opinions. There is no such thing as a "fair"
payment for CEOs as Edwin Lock among others have stated (Society for
industrial&organizational psychology). Another thing worth mentioning is as well that
many of the statements presented here are general statements about CEOs
compensations. These statements are valid both in Finland as well as in other countries.


   5.1.    Arguments claiming overpayment

   5.1.1. CEO payments increased faster compared to other employees
Many people have claimed that the CEO payments have increased much faster than the
compensation for other employees. In fact, when looking at a sample of three Finnish



                                                                                         
large cap companies (YIT, Metso and Fortum) the average increase in the CEO
payments had been 7,92 % between the years 2003-2010. A comparable figure for the
average pay taker in Finland was 3,92 % (Tilastokeskus). See graph 1. However, as
earlier stated Kaplan (2008) showed that the payment for also other talented and
fortunate groups have increased strongly, in fact even faster than the CEO payments.

   5.1.2. Compensations not related to performance
The most important task for the management of a firm is to maximize the shareholder
value. In contrast to this Cooper et al. (2009) found that industry and size adjusted CEO
pay is negatively related to future shareholder wealth. According to their study, CEOs in
the top ten percent of pay earn negative abnormal share price returns over the next five
years of approximately -13%. The effect was found to be even stronger for CEOs who
received higher incentives compared to their peers. If the CEO compensation would be
truly related to performance, studies like Coopers et al. should show correlation
between better abnormal return for companies with CEOs who receive higher salary.
Even if the most important factor regarding the CEO payments should be that the
compensation is connected to the firms' performance, as Edwin Locke among others
have stated, this does not however seem to be the case (Society for
industrial & organizational psychology). A regression study regarding which variables
affects the CEO compensation in Finland will be presented later.

   5.1.3. CEOs influence their own salary
There are several ways how CEOs can try to influence their salary. First of all it is
claimed that CEOs typically try to protect their payments from falling stock prices in
different ways. One way of doing this is by trying to tie stock options to favorable low
market value circumstances. Previous studies like Brookman & Craig (2006) showed
that CEOs compensations were approximately similar to those of a bull market through
a bear market. However, their study consisted of small market capitalization firms
which partly can explain the smaller stock price performance sensitivity to CEO
payments.

Another way how CEOs can influence their own salary is by having good relationships
to the board of directors who are deciding about CEOs compensations. Main et al.
(1995) found that so called "social influence" may be responsible for significant
increments in the CEO compensation beyond what economic theories would predict.


   5.2.    Arguments denying overpayment

   5.2.1. Increasing CEO turnover
Many prior studies have shown that the CEO turnover has increased. In other words
CEOs are fired more frequently today than historically. Kaplan & Minton (2007)
showed in their study that the average annual CEO turnover was 15,6 % from 1992-
2005 for a sample of large U.S companies. In 1998 the CEO turnover was 17.4 %. This
implies that the turnover had an increasing trend. According to a study by
Taloussanomat the situation is similar in Finland. A CEO kept his or her position in
average 4.5 years in 2007. The comparable figure for 2004 was six years (Pennanen,
2008). The increasing CEO turnover explains that the CEO position is more unstable
now days and therefore it's possible to argue that CEOs should be compensated more
today than historical levels imply.

   5.2.2. The CEO payment is just the "normal market price"
The CEO payment is just more or less the market price where demand and supply
meets. This is something what professor Edwin Lock at the University of Maryland has
argued (Society for industrial&organizational psychology). On the other hand; Albert
Cannella professor at A.B. Freeman School of Business at Tulane University argues that
the market for CEOs doesn't work as a normal marketplace since there is not enough
buying and selling going on (Society for industrial&organizational psychology). He
continues by stating that it's extremely rare that CEO's would frequently leave their
positions for higher salaries as it's more likely that the CEO acts in a way to secure his
or her position.


   6. Method 1: What affects the CEO payments in Finland?

In the first method a regression is built up which simply explains which are the most
significant variables affecting the amount of CEO payment.




                                                                                       
     6.1.           Data

The data consists of all the listed OMXH companies with a current market cap greater
than EUR 100m. Financial companies have been excluded since their differing income
statement and balance sheet structure. For a complete list of companies included, please
see appendix 1. The data has been collected from the Bloomberg database. The CEO
salary data have been collected from the companies' webpages.

     6.1.1. Descriptive statistics

 [Table]
[Table]
[Table]

As the dependent variable the total CEO compensation have been chosen. As the
explaining variables: net income growth, share price performance, ROE, ebit margin
and market cap have been used. All explaining variable are averages of 2006-2010. It's
expected that the market cap is the only variable which will show any significant results.


     6.3.       Method 1 results

[Table]


As can see from the result table above, the most significant variable is the size of the
firm, as expected. Bigger firms pay their CEOs more. All the other variables were more
or less not significant even if some of them statistically showed some significance. The
conclusion from the first model is the most important factor determining the CEO
payment is the firm size. This might lead to empire building which was described earlier
in the agency problem section.




                                                                                                 
   7. Method 2: What changes the CEO payment? (work in
       progress)

The second method is going to look at factors which affect the change of the CEO
compensation. As the dependent variable the method is now looking at the change in the
CEO payment instead of the total Lg of CEO compensation, as method 1 did.


    7.1.   Planned variables (work in progress)

[Table]


                                                                                 
8. Conclusions (work in progress)


