Marketing to women
Introduction

Nowadays, marketing to women is booming in the field of marketing and “women” become market’s hot keyword.Faith popcorn, a futurologist, said that 21 centuries is centuries of “EVEolution” which is a compound word formed from the words “Eve” and “Evolution”.
From women-only credit cards to mobile communication service, lots of services and products only for women are rapidly rising. Women buyers are getting more attention from marketers than ever before.Women make 85% of all consumer buying decisions and spend more than 3.3 trillion annually. Considering those statistics, marketing to women is regarded as the best and fastest way to make profits in today’s market. Marketing expert Tom Peters says, “I have never before tripped over an opportunity this size.” Approaching women is not a recommendable thing to do but what marketers must do.

According to this tendency, many companies from automobile market to sports market want and need to attract women. It is not wonder that marketing to women has become a priority to a lot ofcompanies and marketers.In reality, however, not all of them are successful and about 70% of women feel misunderstood by marketers. That is, despite of the importance of women in today’s market, marketers are not approaching them in a proper way. Why isit so? 

Women market is different from Men market and other markets. It seems that previous studies have not paid attention to the reasons why they react differently.This paper emphasizes that understanding gender differences is the keyin theapproach of women. In order to attract women, itiscrucial to understand why women have different purchasingdecisions than men and how they react differently to similar marketing.In order to accomplish that, this paper focuses on findings about differences between men and women from fields such as anthropology and psychology.

In doing so, this paper hopes to answer to “What is the best way to approach women market and to attract them?” By examining many cases that show the strategies and outcomes of companies which tried to approach women market,it is possible to figure out what kind of strategies can be successful.

This paper is organized into four sections.

Above all, it is important to answer “Why women market?” In order to find out the reason we have to focus on women, this paper will examine the current purchasing power of women.
Next, knowing current marketing effort to reach women is essential. We need to learnwhy some marketers are failing in attracting women, because failure teaches success.By researching cases that can show what went wrong and right, we can find the right direction to take. 
Then, studying the differences that make difference between male and female is needed. To better understand women, it is crucial to know what makes women react differently.
At last, finding the key to approaching women is possible. Based on the fact we examinein previous chapters, the right way to attract women can bedefined.


Why women market?

All over the world, the influence of women in the market is rapidly growing. Why? In modern society, women’s status is changed a lot. According to the women’s increased level of education and income, elite women such as “Alpha girl”, “Gold miss”, “SWAN(Strong Women Achiever, No Spouse)” are briskly participating in social activities.They earn, own, and purchase more than ever before. Women’s income around the world reached about 20 trillion dollars. This figure is expected to increase by up to 28 trillion dollars in 2014 which is more than 2 times greater than the sum of Indian and Chinese market. According to these tendencies, women became major consumer with enormous economic power.

In fact, households across America can thank women’s earning powerfor their steadygrowth in standard of living. It’s true now, and it’s just getting truer: overthe next two decades we will see the immense assets of two generations becomeincreasingly concentrated in the hands of Baby Boomer women. What that means is thatthere’s an existing market and a potential market. Let’s look at a few reasons for thischange in both the current and future women’s markets:

Soaring Income: Over the past three decades (1970-1998), men’s median incomehas barely budged, while women’s has soared.
Narrowing Wage Gap: While it’s true that on average, full-time year-round workingwomen earn only 76 cents on the dollar compared to their male counterparts, thatwage gap is narrowing rapidly. In 1998, women 25-34 earned 83 cents on the dollar and young women 19-24 earned 89 cents.
Earning More: As of 1999, 30% of women out-earned their husbands.

Over the next decade, women will control two thirds of consumer wealth in the United States and be the beneficiaries of the largest transference of wealth in our country’s history. Estimates range from $12 to $40 trillion. Many Boomer women will experience a double inheritance windfall, from both parents and husband. The Boomer woman is a consumer that luxury brands want to resonate with.The number of wealthy women investors in the U.S. is growing at a faster rate than that of men. In a two-year period, the number of wealthy women in the U.S. grew 68%, while the number of men grew only 36%.Wealthy boomer women are the marquee players in our country’s culture and commerce.

Single women are spending enormous money in variety areas such as finance, premium clothes, and cultural activities and it is much higher compare to single men. The more attractive thing in women purchasing power is that, however, in addition to their own income and consumption, women are controlling most of the spending in the household.Maria T. Bailey, a pioneer of Mom marketing, pointed that women have cardinal meanings in that they purchase all daily necessaries and household establishments. That is, mom’s propensity to consume has an influence on consumption habit and purchasing decision of their family members.Also, as mom can affect their young children, they can form future consumers’ behavior. The generally accepted estimate of women’s buying power puts it at 80% ofall household spending. Women account for the following:

85 percent of all consumer purchases, ranging from cars to computes
91 percent of new homes
66 percent of personal computers
92 percent of vacations
80 percent of health care decisions
65 percent of new cars
89 percent of bank accounts
93 percent of food purchases
93 percent of over-the-counter pharmaceuticals

As you can see above, women’s purchasing power is very enormous and more profitable than any other segment market.

Another reason marketers are focusing on women buyers is the fact that their ripple effect is huge. Women do not enjoy shopping alone. Their characteristic which is communicative and developed linguistic sense is applied to consumption too, so they shop with friends. Also, women converse about their purchasing item with others 6.3 times more than men do, which causes accompanied spending. From this point of view, women are the best target for WOM (Word of mouth) marketing or Buzz marketing. Moreover, recently women power in WOM marketing is sharply growing according to a huge number of women communities and wife-loggers thanks to the internet.Since women are really affected by recommend or opinion of their friends when they make purchasing decision, women’s “word of mouth” can be powerful promotion means.

Finally, women show relatively stable propensity to consume in a dull season. Of course their consumptions also shrink, but are less affected compare to men. That’s because main consumption items of women are necessaries such as cosmetics, clothes, and groceries. It is different from men’s decreasing consumption of alcoholic beverages in a slack time.

In short, marketers should focus on women market in that they have rapidly growing economicpower, an enormous influence as a purchasing representative, huge ripple effects and stable propensity.


What is happening in current market?

In the past,marketing to women was limited to cosmetic and clothing market, but recently it has been applied to market which was mainly men market such as finance, IT, and alcoholic beverages. To understand current effort to attract women,let's have a closer look at some cases.

Wyndham Worldwide Hotel: Women on their way

Wyndham Worldwide is one of the world's largest hospitality companies across six continents. This hotel which is world-renowned hotel brand has focused on marketing to women who have business trip and travel alone. As a result, the percentage female customer which was only 1 percent accounts for more than 50% now. 
“Women on Their Way” is the hospitality industry's longest-running branded program entirely dedicated to female travelers. Since the program's launch in 1995, Wyndham has supported women travelers as they've emerged from a niche market to a formidable force, listening and responding to women's feedback, which has resulted in a better hotel experience for all travelers; including the addition of various amenities to hotel rooms such as coffee makers, full length mirrors and healthier room service menus.
Today, Wyndham is committed to women travelers more than ever. Ideas and suggestions from women are keys in improving the hotel travel experience for everyone - not just women. Wyndham takes pride in being a community to its customers and has a long history of its commitment to women and their families.
Wyndham is proud to call the WOMEN ON THEIR WAY program a success. As evidenced by women business travelers who recognize and appreciate the program's efforts, Wyndham continues to lead the industry's women travel market with innovative programs and opportunities for women and their families.

Volvo: YCC (Your Concept Car)

Women form an increasingly important customer group for Volvo Cars. In theUnited States, 54 per cent of all Volvo buyers are women and the percentage offemale customers in Europe is growing steadily too.Marti Barletta, an American expert on female consumerpatterns, claimed: “If you meet the expectations of women, you exceedthe expectations of men”. It was a fantastic opportunity for Volvo, and being inspired by those facts and Marti, the managers of Volvo decided to develop YCC.

The Volvo YCC launched at the Geneva motor show in 2004 is a concept car designed bywomen for women keen to change the way most cars are designed with male drivers in mind. The stated goal of this car is to meet the particular needs of women driverstargeting the most demanding premium customer:the independent, professional woman. In order to do so, Volvo assembled a design team entirely made up of women. It was a major exercise in ergonomics from the perspective of a female driver.Unlike other car companies which advertise that they made car for women only after modifying several part of car for the convenience of the female customers, Volvo made the YCC a women-only car from the planning stage.

Comfort for female drivers is an area traditional car designers often ignore, according to Volvo´s women. They have implemented a body scanning system which enables the car toautomatically adjust seats, mirrors, steering wheels and pedals. And for women with ponytails, there is even a split in the middle of the headrest. "It is very uncomfortable to drive with a ponytail," said Ms. Christiansen, design manager of Volvo.

Besides, it is designed to make it easy for women to get in and out of the car. Entry into the car was by the means of two gull-wing doors on the sides. It also had an upwards opening hatchback door giving access to the trunk and cargo area. All three doors were motorized for a sensor-based “keyless” entry. Pressing on a single button on the keychain automatically opened the nearest door, making it easy for somebody holding bags of groceries or other sundries to get the things in the car without putting anything on the pavement or the sidewalk. 
Furthermore, there are many functions for women’s convenience. YCC is designed to help women usually not good at parking park with ease. Also, more choices and flexibility exist which is good news to women who likes sensuous things. You can radically change the look of the car interior whenever you feel likeit. There are eight exchangeable seat pad options to choose from, everything fromdark brown leather, linen and wool bouclé, to a shimmering yellow-green embroidered seat pad.

As you can see above, YCC is made thinking women from first to last. In doing so, Volvo could captivate women’s heart.


What makes differences?

In accordance with the huge influence of women in market and economics, it seems that attention to women will increase more and more. If so, female consumers, how differentare they really? In order to understand them deeply, let’s examine psychological, physical, and social features of female consumers.

Psychological difference

If the women are expressed in a word, it would be emotional animal. Female consumers are the leading part of “sensitive consumption”. Sensitivity which is one of the main keyword of 21 centuries is in the central part of their consumption. They also want to express their emotions in words and to have connection with other people. Women like to share their emotions with others and to gain the sympathy. That’s why emotion-based advertising has a powerful pull for women. It’s important for women to have a shared moment and shared feelings.
When it comes to actually making the decision, women generally make purchase decisions on a more emotive level, whereas men go more with the facts and data. Women prefer a narrative, a story with the faces and the interaction and the relationships that are occurring. 

Physical difference

Depending on hormones, there is a discrepancy between women and men. Testosterone, which is representative of the male hormone, deals with men’s characteristic of aggression, assertiveness, lust for control, competition, adventure. There are estrogen and progesterone as a representative of the female hormone.
Estrogen gives satisfaction to the child care and home care and inhibits the induction and testosterone. Progesterone is a hormone that stimulates the maternal instinct. In addition, oxytocin and serotonin are hormones which make women pursue a relationship with others

Also, the brain function of women and men can tell the difference. Men use brain locally and partially so that it can work intensively. However, women use different areas of the brain, so the ability to correlate is outstanding, so men have detailed thinking and women have integrative thinking. Female are more intuitive than men because they have rich corpus compare to men. According to brain scientists, man’s brain has more excellent ability to link back and forth of the brain, so to rush forward to chase the target is easy. In other words, they are good at targeting to hunt and concentrate on it. On the other hand, woman has developed ability to connect the sides of their brain and it is good structure to analyze circumstance comprehensively and apply. While men do step-thinking to deduce, women do web-thinking not thinking straightly but going and coming here and there. Men tend to be single-minded and focused, whereas women tend to be multi-minded and integrated. Men like to structure their lives linearly: first things first, finish one thing before you go on to the next, get the most important things done before you tackle anything lower on the list. Women pursue several tasks simultaneously.

In addition to that, women have a keen sense speaking of body structure. Commonly it is believed that women have more developed five senses. Even if they buy a small item, female consumers have a strong desire to experience and check with their five senses such as seeing, hearing, and touching. It is generalized to equip with testers which make people experience products directly in the stores whose main consumers are women such as perfumes and cosmetics. Recently an eye-catching color and fragrance marketing is also a way to stimulate their senses, evoking the desire to purchase.

Social difference

Compared to male consumers, female consumers have excellent socialization and friendly communication skills. Women have characteristic which is to love to come together and talk about things and it forms “Word of Mouth” which has huge influence on purchasing decision.

Difference in purchasing

Men prefer to focus in on the important things -namely the top few items on theirlist of criteria. Once they find something that meets all the key criteria, theyare ready to move ahead on a decision. Men define the productor service they want in terms of the features that are most important to them, formulating a short, focused list of key decision criteria and then finding a solution that meets those criteria. When they find the solution, they buy–they are done.
Women, on the other hand, start with a more generalized sense of the situation they want to address, factor in additional considerations as they move through the decision process, and keep exploring options until they are satisfied that they have found not just a workable solution, but the best possible answer. In shorthand: men are buyers, whereas women are shoppers.
According to research, 61 percent of women say that when making a clothing purchase they visit several different stores before deciding what to buy.
When embarking on a new purchase, men go looking for a good solution, whereas women set out to find the Perfect Answer.
When buy something men discard unimportant criteria, but women are more likely to be adding them.

In short, the differences between men and women come from their psychological, physical, and social features and it makes them have different behavior and reaction in decision making and purchasing.

The key to attracting women

From previous chapters, it can be concluded that understanding their sensitivity, physical features, and social inclination is crucial in order to approach and attract female consumers. 
Let’s see what marketers should do to with these findings.

Forget about stereotyped image of women. 
Marketers should notice that women are not women in the past any more. They start to enjoy rock-climbing and off-road driving ride Harley Davidson. To discard old prejudices and see things from a new perspective is needed. Let’s talk about Nike which launched women sports apparel successfully. Nike is gaining sensational popularity from female customer by showing comfortable, simple, and active sportswear for women. In the 21 centuries, sports and fitness trends were led by women not men because of the popularity of yoga and various dancing. According to this movement, Nike could be successful by changing their concept of sports as what women do and actively marketing to women. This example shows that to break the prejudice such as women? sports is important. 

Women’s sensitivity should be satisfied. 
There are two way to do that. Make them princess or emotionally satisfied. Women consumers have a strong desire to be treated. In particular, the busy housewives who are sick and tired of the things with all the households have stronger desire. If female consumers feel that they become a princess when entering the shop or using products, that would be successful. The point is that approach women with Concierge marketing from the eye level of women consumers to provide what they want. Using a small space for women-only shelter or powder room can be an example. 
In addition to that, emotional marketing should be used to women. The importance of emotion in the latest marketing is well-known. For example Starbucks coffee shops could achieve great success with their own emotional marketing. They stayed away from coffee sales and approach consumer with relaxed atmosphere and unique Starbucks’ culture. As seen in this example, the shop should be a place that can help consumer to better understand the products and feel friendly with it so that it can stimulate consumers' hidden emotions. In particular, since the female consumers see the things in the peripheral vision, they are influenced by the atmosphere and customer service.

Make busy women less busy.
Of course men are also busy, but recently women’s lives are even more complex than that of men according to the increased social participation of women. As more and more women are entering the workforce, she has to wear many hats. Especially housewives who have to go to work also have to do shopping, cooking, cleaning, laundry, childcare, and taking care of all other things for family. As a result, they have trouble in doing so. Thus, companies can get female consumers’ purchasing power by providing programs or products that can help women deal with their complex tasks.
Also, since they live in a busy and complex life, companies should not sit and wait. That is, they should jump directly to women’s life in order to make it easier for them to save time and energy and feel convenient. In doing so, it is possible to get closer to busy women and get loyalty from them.

Use word-of-mouth tactics. 
It is essential to take advantage of women’s word-of-mouth effect. Business can be successful by using this tactics. According to Faith popcorn, a futurologist, women instinctively liked to be connected each other. There are lots of information and recommendation about what they have and buy among women who connected each other. If marketers make the best use of these women characteristics, therefore, it would be easier to attract women. 
Companies can build high confidence relationship between company and customers by establishing community and relationship among female consumers who can share their experience about service and products and by connecting them with company.

Until now, this paper focused on characteristics of female consumers who are getting more and more attention recently and answered to how to marketing to them. Companies should understand the difference between men and women and apply it to their marketing. In doing so, they can approach and attract female consumers.  
