FAIR USE IN DEFENDING REMIX CULTURE IN THE EUROPEAN UNION

INTRODUCTION

Inarguably, the way music is consumed today is very different from what it used to be. The
digitalisation and the development of the internet have led to a myriad of new ways to distribute and
consume music. According to European Commission, user-generated content is emerging and
having a new and important role alongside professionally produced content. This has an increasing
social, cultural and economic impact on content industries, as consumers expect more freedom and
flexibility to express themselves by re-creating new works from previous works. This can be seen
as consumers becoming content providers on sites like YouTube, Daily Motion and MySpace in
what is nowadays called the "second-generation internet". One of the many examples of this kind
of creativity are so-called mash-ups, which are created by combining parts of several different
songs in order to create a new, arguably original, piece of music. For instance, Girl Talk, a well
known artist in this genre, has a song consisting of 200 to 250 samples from 167 artists.


This new phenomenon, however, is in contradiction with the current state of the copyright law.
According to Directive 2001/29/EC, the authors shall have the exclusive right to reproduce a work
"in whole or in part" (Article 2), which means that a license should be sought for even a part of
copyrighted material included in a mash-up piece. Inpractical, time consuming and costly as this
can become, most of the creators of the new digital era never seek for these licenses. As regards to
Girl Talk, since no permission was asked from the authors of the songs, his song was removed from
several online shops quite shortly after his emergence in the public's and especially the copyright
owners' awareness. Thus, this remix culture, as Lessig calls it, is unable to survive in the current
legal environment, because the efforts and the financial resources required to ensure its legitimacy
are unfeasible.

The fundamental point of interest in relation to the remix culture from a legal viewpoint is the scope
of limitations applied to copyright protection. The Directive 2001/29/EC aims to harmonise these
exceptions on a European level in an exhaustive list in Article 5: Exceptions and limitations. They
include certain technical as well as practical cases where copyrighted material can be used without
there being an infringement. However, only Article 5(3)(k) is in a remote relation to
abovementioned remixing, excluding copyright protection in cases of caricature, parody or pastiche.
As for now, there is no legal support for remix works relying on still protected material as such, and
the only way would be to show that the work one has created is a parody of some kind.


In the core of the issue lies a dilemma: should user-generated content, that uses material from
copyrighted works, be allowed and accepted as a modern output of creativity, or should the
traditional philosophy behind copyright be respected and thus the exclusivity valued on the cost of a
new, potentially flourishing, market of remix culture?


This study aims to discover, whether or not the legislative development in Europe is shifting
towards preferring the existence of works built upon existing copyrighted works. The research lies
on the principal of fair use, which is an exception to copyright protection, and the research question
will be whether or not the European concept of exceptions and limitations is likely to cover for
remix culture in audiovisual works made available online in the future. This study will be
conducted by using a qualitative research method, where legal cases and rulings the Court of Justice
of the European Communities (further referred to as ECJ) from the last five years function as
indications of how Article 5 of Directive 2001/29/EC is interpreted within modern legal practice. It
will then be assessed whether or not these cases and rulings have given an increasing preference
towards allowing remix culture to exist and be made available.

1 Remix culture

In this chapter it will explained what remix culture is, how it has developed and what are the basic
consequences, good and bad, of it. The term, as such, is used by Laurence Lessig, an American
lawyer practicing within copyright issues and having written extensively on issues related to new
technology and copyright. Other literature is also used for describing the emerging artform. The
chapter will demostrate the issues and problems faced when dealing with remix culture, be it in the
form of creating or distributing and sharing.

2 Fundamentals of copyright law


Certain aspects of copyright law will be uncovered to give a basic understanding of the philosophy
why copyright protection is granted and how it functions. The chapter will discuss the scope of
copyright protection, its function as an incentive to create as well as the idea of giving a limited
monopoly.


3 Fair use in the European Union


This chapter explains what the concept fair use means and how it functions in the European
copyright legislation. Fair use is used in the American copyright system as an umbrella term for all
exceptions to the scope of protection of a copyrighted work. In Europe, these exceptions are
described in an exhaustive list in Article 5 of the InfoSoc Directive 2001. This chapter will
elaborate on some of those exceptions that best connect with the issue at hand. There are
differences in the national implementations of the Directive, because most of the exceptions there
are permissive, in other words giving the Member States the possibility to choose whether or not
they would like to implement certain amount of them in their own copyright legislation. This leads
to an unharmonised situation in relation to exceptions and limitations.


3.1 Exceptions and limitations


There are certain uses that are not regulated by copyright law, for example those of public interest.
It must be secured that property rights are not used oppressively or contrary to countervailing public
interests. This is why there are exceptions and limitations to the protection of copyright that allow
certain kind of use of the copyrighted material. This chapter will explain what kinds of exceptions
are found from the InfoSoc Directive. Those that best connect with the issue at hand will be
elaborated on.

3.2 National implementations


Since the field of national laws in relation to exceptions and limitations is unharmonised, there are
certain differences between national copyright laws of the Member States within the EU. This
chapter will uncover some of those differences in order to describe the fragmentation of the field of
copyright law within the EU.




4 Research problem and research question


There are several examples of a new form of culture that is created from existing pieces of music.
The creators of this culture regard themselves as creators of new works, rather than someone who
merely steals the intellectual property of others. It is unknown as of now whether or not there is a
possibility for this form of culture to legally exist in the future. Therefore it needs to be researched
how the issue is perceived within the European case law in order to establish what the future
direction might be. The research question will be: Is fair use as a concept likely to cover for remix
culture within the EU in the future?

5 Case law: Fair use in defending remix culture in the EU

This chapter will give an overview of legal cases in both the Court of Justice of the European
Communities and national courts of the Member States. The decisions will be analysed from the
viewpoint of how they line up with the exceptions and limitations in Article 5 of the InfoSoc
Directive.


5.1 Rulings of the Court of Justice of the European Communities

ECJ rulings will be uncovered and analysed here. Important aspects in the rulings include the
references to Article 5 in the InfoSoc Directive and how this article is interpreted in relation to
different kinds of uses of copyrighted material.


5.2 National case law of the Member States

Decisions from the national courts of the Member States will be presented and analysed here. If
there are certain national courts ruling in a substantially different way from other national courts,
this will be highlighted.


6 Conclusions

The results and their implications will be discussed here. Conclusions will be drawn in order to
finally answer the research question based on the finding in the case laws of ECJ and the national
courts. Patterns will be looked for in terms of how remix uses are regarded in these courts,
especially in relation to the Article 5 of the InfoSoc Directive.
