Life Cycle Management of Open Source ERPs in SMEs

1    Introduction

The magnitude of an ERP implementation initiative is a classic issue of discussion in ERP research. 
Traditionally companies have relied on big and expensive commercial ERP solutions
from well known vendors, such as SAP, Oracle and Infor. Usually such companies charge
prices starting from millions of euros for the installation, consultation, training and other required 
tasks related to the installation of an ERP. Large enterprises are typically in possession
of enough resources to cover all required expenses, whereas proprietary ERPs are much less
affordable to SMEs. Thus research and development of open source ERP is significant for
SMEs.

    The success factors in the implementation of ERP into enterprises has been studied extensively 
in the past decade. Of the many CSFs, allocation of experts, balanced team,
definition of scope and goals, deliverable dates, management support and commitment to
change have been the most extensively studied [Xia, Lok, and Yang, 2009]. Likewise the
factors of failure have received considerable attention, including issues related to the organization 
culture, management base, allocation of experts and limitation of capital [Xia et al.,
2009]. A large body of data suggests that most companies attempting to integrate ERPs have
failed [Chen, Law, and Yang, 2009, Kumar, Suresh, and Prashanth, 2009, Xia et al., 2009,
Capaldo and Rippa, 2008, Johansson and Sudzina, 2008]. As ERPs often are the single most
expensive information technology (IT) investment for enterprises, knowledge of how to increase 
the success rate of such initiatives has great importance for industries.

   A long-standing problem has been to obtain more information on CSF relating to open
source ERP, which are especially attractive to SMEs due to the smaller commitments involved. 
Many investigators have recently turned to research open source ERP success factors,
while researching less and less ERP which is not open source. The change can be seen in the
amount of published articles (see appendix B).

    The general features of ERP implementation process models are well mapped [Chen et al.,
2009, Kumar et al., 2009, Xia et al., 2009, Capaldo and Rippa, 2008, Manarvi, Irfan and Ahmad,
2008, Motwani, Subramanian, and Gopalakrishna, 2005]. E.g. one standard ERP implementation 
framework consists of three phases: pre-implementation (including understanding 
the goals of ERP, commitment by top management and cultural and structural changes),
implementation (inculding project management, package selection and establishing common 
communication policies) and post-implementation (including audit and documentation)
[Motwani et al., 2005].

    It is generally accepted that open source ERP can bring SMEs huge savings over choosing
commercial packages. Yet at the same time consultants of open source ERP might cost double
that of consultants of commercial solutions Johansson and Sudzina [2008]. For both types of
ERP there are common costs, such as learning, installation and maintenance costs.

    Observations by Chen et al. [2009] suggest that the following six project management
areas are CSF in ERP implementation: scope, human resource, risk, communications, procurement 
and integration. Kumar et al. [2009] argued that the following things are crucial
for a successful implementation: provision of exact data from legacy systems and on entry 
to the new system, undertaking of proper training of new system, avoidance of usage of
parallel systems, doing at least one conference room pilot before system launch, practice of
employee retention programs, less than 30 % customization of initial packages and clarity
in management objectives and expectations and identification of all stakeholders. Data have
been presented in the literature which show that in SMEs in China the following issues can
be problematic when implementating ERPs: organization culture, management base, absence
of IT engineer and limitation of capital [Xia et al., 2009]. On the other hand it has been suggested 
that CSF are: top management support, great competence tea, right implementation
scope, management program change, data accuracy and education and training [Xia et al.,
2009]. Johansson and Sudzina [2008] concluded that clearly there are other factors than cost
which need to be taken into consideration when choosing whether to adopt a open source
ERP or a proprietary.

    A considerable amount of research has been carried out relating to life cycle management
of ERP and about open source ERP. However, less attention has been paid to critical success
factors in life cycle management of open source ERP in SMEs.

   The purpose of this paper is to describe how to manage the life cycle of free and open
source ERP. The research questions are:


   1. How are open source ERP different from proprietary ERP?

   2. What does ERP LCM consist of?

   3. How is open source ERP LCM different from proprietary ERP LCM?

    4. Based on the paper's findings, which available open source ERP are suitable for SMEs?


    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents a history of ERP, shows some
statistics about the present market shares and describes how ERPs are categorized. Section 3
describes the difference between open source ERP and proprietary ERP. Section 4 presents
the life cycle management or ERP and what needs to be considered in the process. In section
5, the differences in LCM of open source ERP and proprietary ERP are presented. Next,
section 6 reviews present open source ERPs based on the literature review and suggests a
method to distinguish between the different ERPs. Penultimately, section 7 presents the
contributions of the paper. Finally, section 8 explains the limitations and tells the conclusions
of the paper.

2     Enterprise Resource Planning

The purpose of this chapter is to describe the history of ERP, why it is relevant for business
and how ERP is categorized.

    To put the topic into a larger perspective a brief history of ERP is presented. In the 1960s
the first predecessors of ERP were introduced; the first systems (computerized reorder point
systems) being able to notify when a reorder of inventory should take place. Soon the first
manufacturing planning and control systems (MPCs) were devised. MPCs could read and
write on magnetic tapes, which contained item lists, transactions, bills of material (BOMs)
etc. Later that decade material requirements planning systems (MRP) were developed, with
the breakthrough of random access memory (RAM). The first MRPs were huge, expensive
and required much technical staff. MRP continued to develop until the next breakthrough
happened in the late 1970s, when MRP saw a great increase in demand, mainly due to its status 
as the de facto system for parts and materials planning. All through the 1970s many ERP
related companies were established, including SAP, Oracle, Lawson Software and The Baan
Corporation. Manufacturing management and account system (MMAS) was introduced in
1975. It enabled users to create general ledger postings, job costing and forecasting based
on inventory and production transactions as well as generate manufacturing orders from customer 
orders. According to Jacobs and Weston Jr. [2007] the next version, introduced in
1978, manufacturing, accounting and production information and control system (MAPICS),
included "general ledger, accounts payable, order entry and invoicing, accounts receivable,
sales analysis, payroll, data collection systems support, product and production definitions
[...], inventory management, material requirements planning [...], production monitoring and
control capabilities [...] forecasting, capacity requirements planning, purchasing, and full 
scale master production schedule planning modules". Until the early 1980s the MRPs evolved
enough for a new term to be coined. Manufacturing resource planning (MRP-II) referred to
more sophisticated systems than MRP and included flexible disk drives. During the 1980s
many innovations were made which enabled more flexible MRP-II, including usage of the
programming language RPG2, usage of multi-user supporting UNIX, wide availability of
the SQL database system by Oracle and the human resource management system (HRMS)
offered by PeopleSoft. In the 1990s the term ERP was coined, distinguishing it from its
predecessor mainly by the extend that it is integrated across and within functional silos. In
1992 SAP introduced R/3, which was based on an open client-server architecture, enabling
third-party companies develop software that could be integrated and different operating systems 
run the software. The Y2K problem, later that decade, drove demand of ERP high as
many companies had to change their legacy systems to newer ones, which were Y2K compliant. 
After 2000 and its dot com bubble, several ERP companies merged and in 2005 the
only major players left were SAP and Oracle. The present situation of ERP is marked by the
need to drive the implementation time down to less than 6 months by having more specialized 
standard packages available. Other trends include: ability to transmit data in any format
anywhere in real-time, better simulation capability support and optimization systems, consolidation 
within the ERP industry and increased awareness of world cultures in the design
of ERP systems. [Jacobs and Weston Jr., 2007]

    Next some statistics about ERP vendors are presented. According to Pan [2010a], in 2009
SAP had 31%, Oracle had 25% and MS Dynamics had 15% of the total ERP vendor market
share. 35.5% of ERP projects took longer than planned and 51.4% went over the budget
[Pan, 2010a]. 28.3% of the companies chose ERPs without customizations, whereas 23.8%
chose "completely customized" or "heavily customized" ERPs [Pan, 2010a]. Only 12.4% of
the companies were "satisfied" or "very satisfied" with their selection of ERP vendor [Pan,
2010a]. According to Pan [2010b], the geographical market shares are as follows: North
America 31%, Asia Pacific 31%, Europe 14%, Africa 8% and South America 3%. The study
concluded with stating that ERP implementation initiatives are marked by five issues, which
are: they take longer than expected and are likewise more costly, they under-deliver business
value, software as a service (SaaS) take less time than on-site ERP implementation while
contributing less business value and last that organizations do not effectively take care of
organizational changes related to the ERP implementation.

   Next the typical modules and categorization of ERP is presented. According to Rashid, Hossain, and Patrick
[2002] typical ERP modules are:


          Accounting management
          Financial management
          Manufacturing management
          Production management
          Transportation management
          Sales & distribution management
          Human resources management
          Supply chain management
          Customer relationship management
          E-Business


     To make ERPs dynamic and enable decentralization, typically they follow a client/server
architecture. This enables splitting up of the functionality of the system into a presentation
layer, application layer and a database layer [Rashid et al., 2002]. Practically it means that
each layer may be served on virtually or physically separate devices, allowing more flexibility.

    One study [Parr and Shanks, 2000] distinguishes between three types of ERP implementations, 
based on the physical scope, business process re-engineering (BPR) scope, resource
scope, time scope and technical scope and module implementation strategy. The ERP implementation 
types are: "comprehensive", "middle road" and "vanilla". Comprehensive implementation 
involves multiple site or international implementation, local or international BPR,
minor or major customization, broad module implementation, time greater or equal to four
years and budget greater or equal to $10 million. Middle-road implementation differs from
the previous by including single, rather than international implementation, BPR alignment to
ERP rather than international BPR, not including industry specific module implementation
and having a time budget of over a year and a monetary budget greater or equal to $3 million.
         
Vanilla implementation only includes single implementation, BPR alignment to ERP, minute
modification or ERP and a similar module implementation strategy as middle-road. The time
scope of vanilla is half to one year and the monetary budget is between one and two million
USD. [Parr and Shanks, 2000]

    The descriptions of this chapter shows some statistics of ERP vendor market shares and
geographical distribution. Also modules and categorization of ERPs were presented. The rest
of the paper focuses on vanilla ERP implementation solely, because it is the category that fits
best SMEs.



3     Open Source ERP

This chapter describes how open source ERPs differ from proprietary ERPs. According to
OS2 a software is open source if it conforms with the following criteria:


    1. Redistribution must be unregulated

    2. The source code must be accessible

    3. The source code can be modified and so under the same license as the original

    4. The author might require that the original source code be not edited, but rather allow
       modifications through distribution of patches that make the software functionally different. 
	The author can require that the derived softwares use different names than the
       original.

    5. "No Discrimination Against Persons or Groups"

    6. "No Discrimination Against Fields of Endeavor"

    7. The rights stated in the license of the software applies to all who acquire the software

    8. "License Must Not Be Specific to a Product"

    9. "License Must Not Restrict Other Software"

 10. "License Must Be Technology-Neutral"
         
   Thus software which is not open source might brake one or more of the rules. Two obvious 
benefits are that open source software is free and open, which implies savings through
lower spendings and ability to modify the software at will. Thus it is especially suitable for
SMEs, which cannot necessarily afford expensive proprietary ERPs.

    According to Riehle [2007] there are two types of open source: community developed
and commercial. The main difference between these is that the commercial is owned by a
company which maintains a copyright, whereas community developed software is controlled
by the community. Company ruled open source software is typically free for nonprofit users
and might be free for profit purposes. The main source of revenue for commercial open source
business models is the selling of support services and software add-ons. The conclusion
is that community developed open source ERP is definitely free in every sense, whereas
commercial open source ERPs might be free.

    Summary comes here.



4    ERP LCM

This section describes the life cycle management of ERPs, including what the phases are,
how they are categorized, what they include and how you manage them.

    Summary comes here.



5    Open Source ERP LCM

Summary comes here.



6    Open Source ERP Review

This section will review existing open source ERP based on the literature review and will try
to suggest a method to chose a suitable open source ERP.
         
    Summary comes here.



7    Contribution

This section describes the contribution of the paper.

    Summary comes here.



8    Limitations and Conclusions

Here the limitations (counter arguments and rebuttal), conclusions and future research are
presented.
         
