Determinants that affect the Asset Backed Security (ABS) spread
1. Introduction
The importance of derivatives has grown enormously during the 21st century. The growth of the past decade has been relatively dynamic and the derivative market has become a trillion dollar business. Because of derivatives, companies have an opportunity to hedge themselves against price fluctuation in commodities like oil or cotton. By taking for example a short position in oil, a company like Fortum or Shell can hedge itself against a possible drop in the oil price. This possibility gives companies an ability to secure themselves against price fluctuations and therefore make their economic activity more stable (Carter, Roger & Simkins: 2006).
The financial crisis has brought forward a new topic: securitization. It has been one of the many causes for the emergence of the financial crisis - which many economists have said to be the biggest economic crisis this planet has seen since the stock market crash in 1929. Securitization involves basically three parties; lenders, borrowers and a financial institution that acts as an intermediary. One type of these derivatives that pool the borrowing entities together are Asset Backed Securities (ABS). An ABS combines many investors into a pool and therefore, together with the acting intermediary, makes the investment more diversified and resistant to defaults. The lending party acts also as a pool and makes it possible for the intermediary to issue large amounts of loans.
The academic field hasn’t been very active studying the topic ABS that much and therefore it is a very interesting topic to study. Firstly, ABS was a very focal security during the financial crisis; the way in which assets were bundled was one of the reasons why the market crashed. Secondly, investors don’t generally know what the determinants are that influence the ABS rate of return. Similar studies have been conducted widely in the corporate bond market but not many which are contemplating ABS. However, there are some previous studies that show that different macroeconomic variables have a fairly high correlation with price fluctuation on ABS spreads. This study will focus on Asset Backed Securities and what determinants have affected its price movement during the financial crises.


2. Theoretical framework
This section of the paper will compile the most important theory that is needed to understand the topic about securitization and the pooling of assets in Asset Backed Securities.
2.1. Securitization
Securitization is a type of tool where assets are gathered to a common pool. Financial intermediaries, such as banks, use securitization to pool together, or in other words buy, assets and after that sell them forward to the public against a premium. These assets can be categorized into many different asset classes such as Mortgage Backed Securities (MBOs), Credit Default Obligations (CDOs) and Asset Backed Securities (ABSs). The first two mentioned derive their value from mortgage loans, i.e. those assets that the intermediary buys and sells forward. This paper focuses on ABSs which consist of a pool of consumption base assets, e.g. car loans, consumption loans and credit card loans. The figure bellow illustrates how the concept of securitization of ABSs works:
[Figure]
The so called borrower borrows assets to the investor which in this case can be an individual or a company which has for example a credit card or wants to take a car loan. The borrower finances this procedure by issuing debt to the entity called the originator. When a pool of assets is gathered the borrower sells this pool of assets to a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV). The assets are transferred to the SPV because if the investor, which has a liability to the SPV and furthermore to the originator, files bankruptcy the borrower is not directly responsible to the originator. The SPV is said to be “bankruptcy remote” which means that if the investor defaults the SPV doesn’t have to pay the originator any kind of compensation. As already mentioned the financial intermediary pools these assets together which is important because then the investor and originator don’t have to find themselves at the market. Upon that if there wouldn’t be any intermediary either of the parties would have to find an opposite part that matches the exact same needs, i.e. the same amount of borrowing or lending and a contract that has for example the same type of interest rate.
2.2. Tranches
The originator can invest in different tranches in these ABS pools. When for example a car loan is issued the credit rating of the investor is measured every time to make an estimate what the possibility of a default is. Standard & Poor´s (S&P), which is a financial service company all around the world, provides credit ratings mostly for companies. The ratings can though be applied for anyone who is granted any type of a loan. The S&P credit rating scale ranges from AAA to as low as D, i.e. the first mentioned being the best possible rating (less likely to default) and the second mentioned almost certain of default.
These tranches were built upon these verities of credit ratings which the originators invested in. In this process the assets that had the best possible ratings contained less risk than the assets that were categorized as investment grade, .i.e. those assets with the worst credit rating. The choice that the investor must make is what kind of a risk-return relation is suitable. The best possible ratings contain least risk but offer on the other hand lower yields (interest rates) than the investment grade assets.
2.3. Advantages and disadvantages of the securitization process
The whole securitization process has a great impact on how liquid the assets of the ABS are for the investor and the originator part. The investors (originators) have an opportunity to earn a higher rate of return on their investment than if they would go directly to the market. The different ABS pools make it possible for the investor to freely choose what kind of a risk-return level is suitable. Furthermore, the investor can choose what asset type is the appropriate one to invest in.
The issuer has a very central role in the process and therefore the ground rules are more or less done by it. The profit margin (premium) can be fairly easily altered by the issuer while it is the one who borrows the assets from the originator and issues debt to the investors who have a liability to the issuer. The originator carries less risk because it basically transfers the risk from one party to the other. This requires a lower amount of equity invested in the company, i.e. assets that are bound to be able to be an intermediary which borrows and sells assets. The securitization advantage lies also in the fact that while the intermediary can sell the assets to the SPV the asset is off the intermediary’s balance sheet which enables it to lend at a lower rate of return. This gives a cost saving edge.
For all the three groups one ground rule applies; all the assets are diversified which lowers the systematic risk involved in the investment. 
2.4. The ABS spread
The ABS spread is defined as follows. It is the spread between the interest rate of the specific ABS security and a risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is usually categorized as the 3 month t-bill rate in the United States. (Vink & Thibeault:2008)
3. The financial crisis perspective
During the financial crisis these securities played an important role while the mortgage market bubble burst in the United States. President George Bush’s intention was that every American should be able to afford an apartment and therefore mortgage loans were issued to people that didn’t have the opportunity to do it before. The interest rates on these loans were in some cases extremely high and the total amount of loan was on average fairly big compared to the salary level of the borrower.
When the market crashed the value of the houses fell to a level that was fateful to many holders of a mortgage loan. The value of the mortgage loan remained the same while the price of the house depreciated drastically. This phenomenon had a fateful effect financially on many holders of a mortgage loan which furthermore had an effect on the financial intermediary and the investor in the pool of mortgages which were involved in the process of securitization.
The securitization process described above involved securities which were belong to the classes of MBS and CDO. This had of course also an immediate effect on ABS. If people (the borrowers) that had a mortgage loan had difficulties in making loan amortizations had also major difficulties in paying back their credit card bill(s), car loan and consumption loan. When the borrowers couldn’t pay their mortgage loans any more the financial intermediaries alongside with the investors found themselves in a situation where their investments had dropped in value dramatically. Only those investors that belonged to the group which were in a higher trench group, i.e. had a higher credit rating, got a fairly high amount of their money back. 
4. Previous research
The previous research has found different factors involved in the securitization process that have a correlation with the ABS spread (definition of ABS spread see section 2.4.). In other words these factors have been seen to have a correlation, i.e. similar behavior, with the average spread of the ABS. This paper focuses mostly on the article written by Vink & Thibeault (2008) where they determine factors that could have an effect on the ABS spread. They use a multiple regression model which can be seen in the figure below.
[Figure]
The ABS spread can be seen as a control variable on the left-hand side of the equation while all the explanatory variables can be seen on the right-hand side. All these explanatory variables try to explain why the ABS spread is behaving as it is behaving.
4.1. Results of the previous research
The results which were obtained from the study by Vink & Thibeault (2008) were quite interesting. Some of the factors had and extremely high correlation with the ABS spread while others couldn’t explain why the spread is behaving as it is behaving.
According to Vink & Thibeault (2008) credit rating has a major effect on the magnitude of the ABS spread. Almost every credit rating class had a statistically significant relationship with the ABS spread. The transaction size had also a fairly good explanatory power in explaining the ABS spread. The larger the transaction size the higher the spread also becomes while the risk on larger transactions are higher. Maturity could explain also the ABS spread in a fairly good manner. The longer the maturity of a security the higher the ABS spread also because investors want compensation if they have to bind their money for longer periods.
Factors that didn’t have major difference in the ABS spread were for example the type of originator.

In the last version of this end-of-term paper this sections among others will we more thoroughly described.
5. Analysis and discussion
In the section of previous research different determinants that have or could have an impact on the ABS spread have been presented. These determinants are involved in a way or another in the process of securitization of ABS. They have a direct or indirect influence on what the rate of return of the specific ABS will be.

This section will be discussed broadly after all the aspects (determinants) have been presented in the section of previous research.
6. Conclusion
This paper has examined what are the determinants that have been vital in determine the ABS spread. 
There will be a thorough conclusion after the couple last sections have been written.
