IPR strategies and Business strategies  
1 Introduction
Recently, there has been wide interest in IPR strategies. Many investigators have recently turned to the conclusion that in modern business world a company will not be successful without a proper IPR strategy. Correctly planned and implemented, an IPR strategy enhances a company’s competitive advantage and creates a clear success factor. An IPR strategy needs to be incorporated into company’s business strategy and vice versa. Top management of a corporation has to possess understanding and will to utilize and protect company’s intangible assets. 
Knowledge of IPRs has great importance for multinational corporations (MNC). The value of IPRs has increased during the last decade and it has become a central topic for MNC’s. When competition is getting harder, MNCs needs to take a closer look at their intangible assets and how to benefit from them.

A central issue in defining an IPR strategy is the correct structuring of just the right elements and pieces, which eventually builds the strategy. The future of MNC’s businesses is tied to the ability to take a lead in intangible assets business. The key challenge for MNC’s is to create a strategy that encourages positive growth and ensures that all important assets are protected and used for the company’s advantage. 

In recent years, there have been many papers describing the role of IPR strategies. However, a detailed and focused guideline on the topic is still missing. What is needed today is a clear definition of the key problems and questions around the issue.  This topic is worth investigating, as it would provide much called for information for MNCs on structuring and tailoring their IPR strategies. 

The only reported study to date of IPR strategies in a practical level covered a limited range of information. However, IPRs as such have been extensively studied. Less attention has been paid to practical guidelines as regards the creation of IPR strategy.
1.1 Objectives of the paper

I plan to put forward the facts and main questions that are needed in building an IPR strategy. 
One can argue that current trend of viewing IPR strategies’ role in business strategy goes beyond creation and protection of intellectual products. New topics involve; services, mergers and acquisitions of IPRs, digital convergence, cultural participation into IPRs and hardening relationship between competition law and IPRs. Especially changes in the digital environment and the rapidly globalizing world challenge companies to structure their IPR strategies correctly.

This paper evaluates the effect on role of IPR strategy at company level with a purpose to determine key drivers in creation of such strategy. The topic has also very relevant linkage to modern day business environment, where digital convergence and technology transfer is even more discussed in the context of intellectual property rights and economics. There is still a lack of practical guidance on how to deliver and structure an IPR strategy and implement it all the way to IPR policy level. This paper introduces the key attributes and questions that need to be taken into consideration when planning an IPR strategy.

In this paper, I also argue that the key to a successful IPR strategy is not the size of the IPR portfolio, but the success is generated how well the company implements the IPR strategy. In addition, the role of well-planned enforcement strategy to protect one’s rights increases profitability. Furthermore, this paper hopes to show that IPR strategies involve several elements and the elements vary according to the needs of the company and its business in different time periods.  It is crucial that an IPR strategy is tailored and differentiated according to changing needs and demands of market. A company must have a clear business strategy to which the IPR strategy is tied. IPR strategy is affected by internal and external elements.
1.2 Research Approach

The plan is to address and reach the goals by interviewing selected key companies and their IPR Heads. The purpose is to select ten companies and present to them questions and statements regarding IPR strategy. The goal is to find differences and similarities when structuring an IPR strategy. The study is supported by relevant literature on IPR strategies and business strategies. Analyzing the interview results together with key questions and statements with relevant literature will provide the basis for the thesis. 
2 IPR strategy and its elements

IPR strategy involves several elements and the elements vary according to the needs of the company.  It is crucial that IPR strategy is tailored and differentiated according to needs and demands of changing markets. A company must have a clear business strategy to which then IPR strategy is tied. IPR strategy is effected by internal and external elements.
When looking at ICT companies, it can be roughly said that there are certain main elements in IPR strategy. These are finding the key points that support the companies’ exploitation of IPRs and transferring that into financial capital. Also, creating and acquiring IPRs is part of a successful strategy.
New business models drive companies’ to structure their IPR strategy. No matter is the focus on trademarks, patents or designs, a company needs to secure their innovations carefully and understand from where their assets are derived. Hence, analyzing their intangible assets very carefully and being in close contact to R&D and other business groups within the company ensures that careful mapping of protectable assets is being made. The purpose is not perhaps to protect everything under the sun, but to find the products and/or services which create value and which are worth of protecting. Mapping the IPR strategy means having patents, trademarks, designs, copyrights and trade secrets carefully analyzed. Proper enforcement policy needs to be created in order to defend these rights.  IPR strategy also includes potential licensing plans. Especially, ICT companies need to analyze the need to create revenue streams from IPRs in form of licensing deals.

Below is demonstrated a very basic model of IPR strategy plan. IPR strategy entails several elements, depending on the company structure. The building blocks and emphasis may vary. The key role is to have a dotted line to business strategy and to R&D in order to maintain consistent flow of information. Other supportive functions are not described here below, but to mention a few, these are functions like IPR communications and IPR finance.
[FIgure]

Companies need to determine very carefully their operating business setting. This means conducting a thorough analysis on their assets: defining which of the assets are kept as proprietary and will not leave the company, and which of these are licensed or sold out. 

IPR strategy is loose if it is not tied into IPR policies. These act as guidelines and help in implementing the IPR strategy. IPR policies provide practical means of carrying out the set objectives. With the help of IPR policies the employers are committed to execute the strategy. Also policies are needed to allocate financial and human resources. IPR policies include important elements as; IPR filing strategy, IPR enforcement strategy, IPR licensing strategy, IPR business portfolio strategy, IPR usage strategy, IPR financial strategy, IPR mergers and acquisitions strategy etc.  There is an increasing need for ICT companies to define a strategy and policy for acquiring new business assets. When compiling a complete IPR strategy together with IPR policies, one need to look at the environment where IPRs function, such as regulatory affairs. Following and influencing to future IPR related laws is crucial. All this should be thoroughly communicated to employers and top management. Not forgetting the importance of linking it to business strategy.

Majority of the MNCs have identified assets that generate the most benefits. It is mainly about making the correct decisions regarding assets and exploiting and protecting these. IPR strategy and IPR policies leads to IPR portfolio. Building up a successful and strong IPR portfolio is crucial for MNCs. IPR portfolio, if correctly planned, can generate high revenues, competitive edge and communicate uniqueness to market. When a company has uniqueness, it is in a position where it is able to share and trade those assets and hence create more value.
2.1 Building blocks of IPR strategy

There are several aspects of the field of IPR strategies that still require further investigation, as concrete information on structuring the strategy is missing. The lack of guidelines and lack of right key questions leads to incomplete IPR strategy. However, perhaps the most difficult task is to refine and tailor the IPR strategy according to needs of the company. This is done by understanding its intangible assets. It can be argued that previous research history is not complete in defining these questions. Hence, further contrastive representation of the research lines is needed.

The practical key questions that need to be addressed when planning an IPR strategy are: 

1. Evaluate the innovation: Is it new? Is it useful? Can it be developed in-house? How much R&D resources will be tied into the production process? Will IPR be of any use, and if so, what types of IPR, patent, design, trademark etc?
2. What is the goal, what are the planned achievements and the mission of the IPR strategy? 
3. To provide proof of ownership, or to protect new business ventures, or to prevent unauthorised copying of an idea/invention, or to provide return on R&D investment through technology licensing?
2. Is there a risk of infringing competitors’ IPRs? Have competitors already created something similar?
3. Who owns the generated IPRs? The  company?
4 .Exploitation: Patent, brand (trademark) and market landscapes for the product?
5. Is the IPR strategy tied into business strategy and vice versa? Is there a business support to the IPR strategy?

The above-mentioned key questions form the building blocks of IPR strategy. Based on these questions, a company starts to build and plan their IPR strategy. The mentioned key questions among other defining questions and especially their answers have been to some extent neglected by companies. 

Furthermore the following defining questions/statements needs to be addressed prior putting an IPR strategy together:

1. What are the essential IPR and business priorities? Do these support each other?
2.  Is the purpose of the strategy to find a new way of working which effects to company business strategy?
3. What is the ultimate goal internally of the strategy? 
4. What is the IPR strategy emphasis? Patents, trademarks, copyrights? 
5. Trim/sell/buy new rights? Is there a business support  to this? 
6. What is the innovation plan? Is there a business support to this?
7. Increase/decrease licensing plans? Defensive licensing? Is there a business support to this?
8. What is the wanted return on patents? Is there a business support to this?
9. Risk policy
10. Evaluate the role of open source in patent portfolio creation 
11. Is there enough focus and resources on transformation of industry? (new patents models v old models)
12. Litigation aspects - litigation approach and practices, supported by risk management work
13. Is there resource management to support efficient co-operation with internal business units

Some academics have been against of making practical guidelines as regards the creation of IPR strategy. However, this view is challenged by recent data showing that the heads of MCNs are looking for more detailed, directly applicable information on how to structure their IPR strategy.  
3 IPR strategies and link to economics



It is generally accepted that MNCs that ignores the importance of IPR strategies, will suffer financial losses, sooner or later. It is commonly suggested that an IPR strategy has evident financial and economical effects. Also, IPR strategy needs to be able to change its direction rapidly, as competition and market shares moulds the business field constantly. 
There is much evidence to support the hypothesis that IPR strategy supports business goals and generates market power. However, the relationship between IPRs and economy has not been clearly defined. For years, academics and other policy makers have been pondering what the effect of IPRs is to the economy and vice versa.
A standard procedure for assessing IPRs and their impact to economics has been argued for some time now. The general mindset has been that technological advance is highly important to economic growth and IPRs play a crucial role in this.  This argument can be supported by looking at the patent portfolio of technology driven companies. MNCs with large patent portfolios tend to lead in technology advance and are able to create e.g. monopoly rights. 
IPR strategies are known to influence economical structures. Hence, a company cannot ignore economical facts when structuring its IPR strategy. Economical drivers affect e.g. companies pricing policy, productivity and industry performance. However, IPRs also affect economics, as one can argue that a company which has a more extensive IPR portfolio can ask for higher prices. Measuring the effects of IPR to economics has been argued for decades now. The measurement of IPRs and economics tend to be complex, as IPR assets are generally embedded within certain products, and hence evaluating the separate contribution made by IPRs and other types of assets can be difficult. 
Romer (2000) found a link between technology advance and economic performance when measuring the effects of IPRs in economy. This can be directly linked into incentives generated by IPRs. Furthermore, observations by Romer (2000) suggest that IPRs can be used as a strong incentive to structure an IPR strategy as the trend rate of growth of output per capita increases. This speaks for the fact that IPRs can be used to create more market power. However, it has been argued by academics that IPRs can also limit innovation and competition and increase the prices for consumers. All these views need to be evaluated in the IPR strategy when building it. Poorly built IPR strategy can lead to abuse of monopoly rights. 
3.1 Measuring the effects of IPR strategy 

The question remains how to measure the impacts of IPRs to economy at company level. If the incentive to companies is clear and strong, it should generate more attention to the structuring of IPR strategies. Companies not only need to understand the changes facing their IPR strategy, but they also need to be sensitive to quiet developments around IPRs that sometimes can be more subtle and harder to notice. 

The costs of IPRs have left economists to ponder whether the benefits of IPRs are high enough to encourage innovation. The matter is not clear cut and involves several complex variables. However, today’s MNCs are relying on an IPR strategy that mainly promotes extensive and strong IPR portfolio. The competition between ICT sector companies is extremely hard and so far IPRs have had crucial role when determining strength of each company. It can be argued that productivity directs the elements of IPR strategy. It has been showed that companies with a large trademark and patent portfolio, who do R&D, are more productive. This can be measured by market share generated by IPRs. 
The role of IPR strategies in is inherently important. The IPR game is getting harder and nastier, and the one who knows how to play it the best, will walk out as a winner. Companies need to follow the IPR trends carefully and adopt changes rapidly. An IPR strategy cannot be built separately from a business strategy; this would lead to an inconsistency and loss of economical value. This issue is still not completely understood at company level, mainly because of the measuring of intangible assets is extremely difficult.

3.2 IPRs and value creation 

In order to create value, companies need to look deeper when building their IPR strategies. This means having a wide and thorough knowledge on their IPRs and financial outcome. There is no direct measurement between IPRs and financial outcome so far, as IPRs may in some circumstances represent only a potential value that can be achieved by application of a strategic management system. However, one cannot deny the fact how much IPRs have influenced and added value to companies. This is demonstrated well by a report on “Impact of IP on the value of companies”  indicating that the ratio of Intellectual Capital to Market Capitalization in US companies grew from 17% in 1975 to 80% in 2005. The data from this report indicates that the more IPRs companies have, the higher the market valuation is for these companies.

What seems to be direct link to companies’ capability to create value from IPRs are the competence of the management and the implementation of correct business plans and IPR strategies. This means that the impact of R&D work, amount of patents and other rights, human capital and so on, indicates the average return on investment (ROI) in intellectual assets. And if IPR and business strategy is built properly, the ROI can be high. In order to maintain and achieve a high ROI number, companies need to improve their R&D process efficiency and map it to business and IPR strategy carefully. What also effects the value creation is human capital, goodwill of the company (image and brand) and effective work processes.

Although, it has been much argued whether the value created by IPRs can be actually measured economically, clear indications to that direction has been made. As according to OECD’s report on “Intellectual Assets and Value Creation - Synthesis Report”, it is stated that: …”[t]here are indications that successful implementation of enhanced reporting on intellectual assets can yield a number of benefits in terms of efficiency and value creation. The provision of sufficient and appropriate information about intellectual assets can improve decision-making by investors and help discipline management and boards with positive economic consequences].”
4 Business Strategy and its elements

Prof Gerry Johnson and Prof Kevan Scholes the authors of “Exploring Corporate Strategy: Text and Cases” has given definition for business strategy as follows:…"[Strategy is the direction and scope of an organization over the long-term: which achieves advantage for the organization through its configuration of resources within a challenging environment, to meet the needs of markets and to fulfill stakeholder expectations".
Business strategy consists of several elements. Internal and external factors direct the formation of strategy. First a company needs to set vision, what the core business is all about and where to aim with this. Simultaneously, a mission statement is defined; this is in a nutshell company’s beliefs of the organization position now and tomorrow. After having clear scope of objectives and core competencies, whether it is product or service, one needs to set short and long-term objectives. It is inherently important to define the markets of operation, conduct a competition analyses, who are the stakeholders involved and make a comprehensive mapping of resources and take into account corporate culture.  Business strategy has several levels within a company and organization. Such level strategies are e.g. corporate strategy, business group strategy, operational strategy etc. Business strategy is managed by strategy management, it consists mainly of three main areas; strategic analyses, strategic choice and strategy implementation. 
In strategic analyses the companies’ and organizations external factors are evaluated together with complete analyses of current and future position. Tools such as SWOT-analysis, PEST-analysis and critical success factor analysis are used to get a full overview. 
Michael Porter, an author who has written several books on business strategies and on generic strategies, defines three generic strategy approaches to measure the performance of other companies in industry. These are; cost leadership, differentiation and focus. MNCs operating in ICT sector concentrate in their strategic business planning mainly to consumers and uniqueness.  These are important elements, as one needs to differentiate from one other in order to gain market leadership. When a company is consumer led, such as several ICT sector companies, there is a continuous and progressive development around innovation and finding a product or service that differentiates. Hence, business strategy needs to be tied into IPR strategy in order to protect uniqueness and innovations. 

5 Conclusion

It is evident that managing IPRs is a versatile and demanding task; it requires extensive and long-term strategy in order to be economically successful. A considerable amount of research has been around this topic but little research on how to define these issues on practical level. Research has tended to focus on higher level theories rather than practical guidelines on how to implement and structure an IPR strategy. 
The role of IPR strategies will increase in the future, as IPRs has entered in all business areas. However, challenges exist on how to balance in the world of complex legal rights. 


