How Chinese Culture and Legal Regulations Influence Venture Capital Cycle

Dear professor, I changed my topic several times. The truth is that there are not so many related papers but I really want to do some contribution to my thesis and keep on this research area. Here is all I can catch before the deadline. I will send you another one in a week. Sorry for bothering so much. Thank you so much!

1. Introduction

As an important part of the private equity, venture capitals (VC) fill the void of the traditional financial market by funding the high-potential but also high-risk start-up companies, which can hardly get money through the traditional capital channels such as government funding or loan from banks (Zider 1998).Especially in the developed countries such as American and some European countries where VC industry is set in a mature legal system and innovative culture background, VC plays such an important role in supporting newly started company to realize their idea with necessary funding and “promoting the emergence of numerous high-growth firms” (Ahlstrom &Bruton2006) that VC is essential to active a country’s entrepreneurship and innovation thereafter contributes to one country’s economic growth (Bruton&Ahlstrom 2006). However, the situation that VC faces will be different in the country that does not create a comfortable environment for the VC industry, so the way in which the VC will be operatedwill also be different (Ahlstrom &Bruton 2003). In Hazarika, Nahata and Tandon’sstudy (2009), the cultural dimension and the institutional context, which includes political, economic and legal factors, can significantly influence the VC’s performance, practices, and success.  

During the past decades, China has experienced big boom in its economy and becomes one of the fast developing countries and one of the biggest emerging markets. The economic boom gives rise to the development of Chinese financial market, including the VC industry.However, at the same time, as China is a developing country that has more than five thousand years history and experienced various political and economic revolutions in different time, China formulates a relatively complicated background with special culture, politics, and legal systems. According to the institutional theory, which points out that the beliefs, goals, and actions of individuals and communities arestrongly affected by various environmental institutions (Scott, 1995) that are developed under the influence of culture, politics, economics, and legal regulations, Chinese special background can influence the VC’s development and make Chinese VC industry different from that in other western countries. Concerning the institutional theory covers too many different aspects of the environment that an institution is in and will be too broad for a short paper to analyze, this paper will only focus on the legal regulation dimension and cultural influences on different segment of VC cycle. The paper will be structured as follows:
At the beginning, some basic knowledge of venture capital cycle will be given out. For every single venture capital cycle, there are mainly three segments: pre-investment, post-investment management, and exit. The pre-investment process is a selection for prospective potential funded firms; venture capitalists in post-investmentmainly focus on structuring relationships andmonitoring the invested firm, and maybe do value-added activities to the funded firm; and in the exit phase, venture capitalists employ different exit strategies to convert their non-liquid equity in the invested firms into liquid equity (Ahlstrom &Bruton 2003, Clercq, De Dirk, et al., 2006). For the pre-investment and post-investment phases of VC cycle, this paper will pick up the most cultural relative features of the VC and check how Chinese culture affects these features. For the exit phase, I will analyze how Chinese legal regulation affects the VC’s exit in China.

2. Characteristics of Venture Capital Cycle

2.1 Description of Venture Capital
Venture capital is an equity financing of young, high risk companies. It is the capital seeking for high returns behind the high risks. In order to generate a high return from the invested company, venture capitalists would do some value-added services to foster the enterprise’s high growth. 

The typical and classicalVC tends to have the following basic characteristics:
(1) Invest to the Star-up, small and medium enterprises and high-tech enterprises.
(2) The investment period is around 3-5 years. VC’s investment is generally equity investment, and typically accounts for more than 50% of the shares of the invested enterprise to get the controlling stake. The investment from VC does not need any collateral from the invested firm.
(3) Investment decisions are made on the basis of highly specialized procedures.
(4) Venture capitalistsoften get involved in the management of portfolio companies and providing value-added services; In addition to the seed stage (seed) financing, generally on the subsequent stages of development in the investment and corporate finance needs to be met.
(5) Investment in the pursuit of excess returns, after being put in corporate value-added, investment capital by the withdrawal of listing of the IPO, mergers and acquisitions, or other ways of equity transfer, to achieve value-added.
(6) VC is high investment with high risk.The average possibility of an investment to be a failure is about 70%, but if the investment is successful, it will obtain high return.

2.2 Venture Capital Cycle

The steps that every VC cycle needs to follow can be illustrated as the Figure 1. Every step has special implications for the VC practices.

[Figure] 


2.2.1 Pre-investment

2.2.2 Post-investment

2.2.3 Exit

3. Analysis

