Literature overview of studies related to health promoting activities

Introduction
The quality and the actions of the management team are important when explaining reasons for both short- and long-term sick leaves. These factors can also be taken into consideration when examining sustainable work-related health and improved health among the employees and the leaders’ subordinates. The leaders of a company can affect the work environment both directly and indirectly. Direct influences are decisions with the aim to reduce work-related burdens. Indirect influences emerge when conditions enable better management of work-related burdens. (Dellve & Skagert & Vilhelmsson 2007:471) 

Future leaders and persons who are currently working as leaders will gain advantages of knowing how to prevent sick leaves, and generally improve the health of the employees. The power of making decisions in a company is allocated to the leaders, which means that they have the greatest ability to really affect the level of well being among the workers. It is therefore qualified to focus on what the management can do to prevent sick leaves.

Work-related health has been researched from many aspects. Dellve, Skagert & Vilhelmsson have focused on the role of leadership when trying to decrease work-related disorders and sick leaves. In 2005, Roskes, Donders & van der Gulden published a study on health- and work-related aspects associated with sick leave. The authors did a comparison of chronically ill and non-chronically ill workers. The results of the study showed that fatigue, emotional exhaustion and perceived health complaints are associated with sick leaves. However, the study was not focused on what the management can do to prevent these sick leaves. (Dellve & Skagert & Vilhelmsson 2007:471; Roskes & Donders & van der Gulden 2005:275) 

This paper is a literature overview of the studies related to what the management of a company can do in order to prevent sick leaves among the workers. The studies will be collected from different academic journals, mostly medical and health journals. The aim of the paper is to gather information about the factors that have the greatest impact on the level of absenteeism. Conclusions can then be drawn on which factors the leaders of the company should focus on.
Some literature overviews on the same topic can be found in the academic research papers written previously. However, these literature overviews do not include both studies on what the reasons for the sick leaves are and studies on what the management can do to decrease the amount of absenteeism. This paper seeks to combine these two kinds of studies in order to present absenteeism-reducing activities that are logically associated with the reasons for sick leaves.   

After this brief introduction follows a more detailed overview of the main tasks of the management, and whether sick leaves are a common phenomenon. The third part of the paper consists of a presentation of studies in this area. An analysis of the studies will be made in the fourth part, and a conclusion of the paper is done in the last part.

Background information

The roles and tasks of the manager
The tasks and responsibilities of the managers can be described in many ways. Some examples will be given in this chapter. The amount of different characteristics that is used in the academic literature to describe a good manager is overwhelming. However, the key points seem to be quite similar to each other. It is important that the managers understand that they have the main responsibilities for the activities of the firm, and that they are in charge of motivating and training the employees to do a great job.  

de Jong, Leenders and Thijssen have studied how the HRD (human resource development) tasks are carried out by first-level managers. The authors wanted to collect empirical data on how the decentralization of HRD responsibilities to the first-level managers is implemented in companies. The question they hoped to answer was: What do first-level managers actually do to realize their HRD responsibility? (de Jong & Leenders & Thijssen 1999:176)

After interviewing 23 HRD directors, the authors found three types of roles that the managers use. The first one is the analytic role. The managers are analyzing and solving performance problems among the workers. The second role is the supportive role, which is achieved by creating favorable conditions for learning. The third one is the trainer role. This role includes directly influencing work behavior. Further, the authors found that the supportive role and the trainer role merely were found in large companies, while the analytic role was descriptive for smaller companies. (de Jong & Leenders & Thijssen 1999:181)

Harrington defines managers as “people who accomplish tasks through their effective use of processes and enablers”. He also states that it is easy to list their areas of responsibility. Examples of tasks are: selecting and training employees, allocating resources and developing the processes. In order to liberate the enthusiasm and creativity that can be found in the employees, the management needs to fulfill these responsibilities. (Harrington 1999:5)
Harrington proceeds by naming a few basic principles that are a part of the sophisticated management method. The managers should not be afraid of disagreement. Disagreement between managers and workers can be healthy, if the managers can use the information to make the best decision. A positive attitude is essential for going concern. Another important factor is the communication system. The management should provide information upward, downward, sideways, to the suppliers and to the customers. One of the best investments an organization can make is offering the employees necessary training and help. (Harrington 1999:6)

Instead of gaining approval of decisions from upper managers, the middle-managers should discuss with the affected workers before making the final decision. A good manager should also have the courage to break free from the traditional “chain of command”. This means, that the manager should be able to work with anybody in order to get the job done. Another argument of Harrington is that the manager should give a pay that is based on knowledge and contribution instead of the time spent on the job. (Harrington 1999:7)

The amount of sick leaves
Guinan discusses a study that showed that the workers in the United Kingdom took 21 million “suspect sickies” during 2006. The cost of these sick leaves was approximately 1,6 billion pounds. The survey was done by the organization CBI and the insurer AXA. Further results showed that 70% of the employers suspected their workers to time the sick leaves to Mondays or Fridays, to get an extended weekend. 39% of the employers believed fake sick leaves can be connected to major events, like sporting tournaments. (Guinan 2007:21)

According to Guinan, some workers see the paid sick leaves as benefits that should be used irrespective of whether the worker is ill or not. Some employees are even planning the sick leave in advance. By planning extra days to take off in advance, the workers are covering for each other on the absence. Guinan explains that the planning of sick leaves in advance happens even among public sector workers. (Guinan 2007:21) 

Worrall has also looked at a study conducted by the organization CBI. Again, the CBI made a survey on sick leaves, and revealed a result showing that the absence bill for 2007 was 13,2 billion pounds. A few years ago, Worrall himself made a survey on the topic of absenteeism. The results showed that some of the very large companies are not aware of the real costs of absence. Therefore these companies have no efficient mechanisms for managing absence intelligently. (Worrall 2008:18) 

The results of the surveys mentioned above show that the large amount of sick leaves, based on both real and fake diseases, is a problem that needs to be solved. If the subordinates of the managers have a high rate of absence, something isn’t working properly in the company. The reasons for the absenteeism can presumably be found in the responsibilities of the managers, as they are in charge of motivating the personnel. 
Studies on the topic

Eriksson, Axelsson and Axelsson examined an intervention program with the purpose to develop health promoting leadership. More specifically, they wanted to find the critical aspects of the program, where the aim is to develop a health promoting workplace. The design of the research is a case study. Managers supporting the program were subjects of the paper. The authors held 17 interviews. (Eriksson & Axelsson & Axelsson 2010:109)

The workplaces used in the study are situated in Gothenburg, Sweden. The city is divided into four districts. The personnel managers in these districts came up with the idea of creating a leadership intervention. They had noticed a high rate of sickness absences in all of the districts, so the aim of the intervention was to help the unit managers building a health promoting leadership. The long term goal would then be to reduce the sickness rate and increase the level of work attendance. (Eriksson & Axelsson & Axelsson 2010:112)

The program was built on different parts. The content of one part was to provide knowledge about health and health promotion. Another part was to change the attitudes and behavior of the managers to a more health promoting direction. More concretely, the program included knowledge-oriented group discussions. A working material based on health promotion at the work place was also discussed. The unit managers were also given coaching in order to better understand their new responsibilities. (Eriksson & Axelsson & Axelsson 2010:115)

The authors named a few positive outcomes from the intervention. The results from the discussion groups were action plans for workplace health promotion. The actions were then specified. The chance for their sustainability was strengthen as the management group supervised the implementation. The managers interviewed pointed out that the reflections and sharing of experiences with other managers helped them developing themselves. (Eriksson & Axelsson & Axelsson 2010:119) 

The results of the intervention program showed the importance of seeing the development of health promoting leadership as means to strengthen the organizational capacity. However, the extensive amount of the program content was seen as something that should be amended. The integration of the program and other similar activities were also seen as something that can cause problems. According to the authors, the benefits of this program will probably still be bigger than the cost, which makes an implementation of the new leadership worthwhile. (Eriksson & Axelsson & Axelsson 2010:119) 

Other studies on interventions concerning health and absenteeism have also been made. Marzec, Golaszewski, Musich, Powers, Shewry and Edington have studied how the employee health status can be improved by using an environmental approach. In this study, the environmental interventions were integrated into the worksite environment. The study was conducted between 2005 and 2007, and about 2300 employees were involved. (Marzec & Golaszewski & Musich & Powers & Shewry & Edington 2011:200) 

The senior management at the company that was participating in the research had noticed that the environment at the workplace didn’t facilitate healthy choices, like chances to be physically active during the day, or choosing healthy food. The measures used in the study were changes in the workplace environment, change in the health risks of the population and a change in the level of absenteeism. (Marzec et.al. 2011:202)

A committee consisting of employees from different divisions worked together with the aim to present ideas with health promoting effects in order to change the workplace environment to the senior management. They created a campaign named “Know your numbers”, which should be held annually. During the campaign, the employees are given free blood pressure and body fat screenings. Another idea was to improve the stairwell. The stairs were given easier access and new paint. The use of the stairs was encouraged by motivational signs. A solution to the unhealthy food options was healthier choices at a deli situated nearby. The company held meetings with the owners of the deli, and as a result the deli promoted more fruit and other healthy food. (Marzec et.al. 2011:202-203)

The level of employee health risk was measured through a questionnaire called HRA (Health Risk Appraisal). 15 health factors are included in the HRA, for example alcohol use, health perception and physical inactivity. The HRA was then used to define the health status of the employees. Depending on the status, the employees were divided into three risk groups: low, medium and high risk groups. (Marzec et.al. 2011:204)

The level of absenteeism was established by summing the employee sick time, and getting an average for each three- month period. The time was measured in hours. Time-off for family care, non-industrial disability and compensation time were also taken in consideration, but not used as the level was so low it had no relevance. About 60 percent of the employees had an amount of sick leaves that was considered relevant. However, the employees with a significantly low rate of sick leaves were obviously included in the analysis. (Marzec et.al. 2011:204-205)

Results from the worksite assessment showed that the overall worksite score improved from 72 points to 129 points. The sub-sections in the assessment were for example administrative support, body fat screening and physical activity. All of the sub-sections got better values, except for smoking. The results of the risk levels showed that the proportion of employees belonging in the low level risk group had slightly increased, but the change was not statistically significant. The proportion of employees in the high level risk group had decreased. Also, the hours of employee sick time for the selected period decreased. (Marzec et.al. 2011:205-207) 

Goetzel, Ozminkowski, Bowen and Tabrizi have written an article where they give advice on how to implement an integrated approach that is based on worksite health promotion and occupational safety and health. They focus on physiological, organizational and human capital models that are needed to receive a functioning health and productivity management. (Goetzel & Ozminkowski & Bowen & Tabrizi 2008:109)

The authors explain why a company would be interested in improving the health of an employee. A healthy employee can work more efficiently, and everything that increases the value of a worker is seen as a benefit for the company. It is also an advantage for the individual worker to take part of a program or similar actions to reduce risks and improve health factors. Risk reducing and health improving actions taken by the management will gain in fewer accidents, lower costs, improved loyalty and an increase in the productivity of the workers. (Goetzel at.al. 2008:115)
Goetzel et.al give concrete examples on how to promote health at work. The senior management can produce writings stating that it is an organizational goal to improve the employee health. The management can also tie business goals and management bonus incentives to the improvement of employee health. Further, the management can utilize the meeting rooms to communicate messages concerning health improvements. (Goetzel et.al. 2008:115)

The employee health and safety program consists of four phases. The first phase includes a diagnostic activity, which is collection and analysis of relevant data. The data gives information on where the problems can be found. The second phase is a strategic and tactical planning phase. A team meets to further analyze the data, and produces an implementation strategy. During the third phase, the interventions are broadly or narrowly defined. One category could be organizational climate and culture. The fourth and last phase consists of measurement and evaluation of the intervention. During this phase, the working team should try to understand why the intervention succeeded or failed. (Goetzel et.al. 2008:117-118)  

Analysis of the tasks of the management
When investigating how the health of the employees can be improved, the management should focus on both the physiological health (to prevent mental exhaustion) and the physical health (for example level of blood pressure). The studies used in this paper were all mainly focusing on the physical health, but some advices were given on how to promote the mental health as well. The most obvious way to prevent mental exhaustion is to reduce stress. The management might not always be aware of the real work burden of the employees. Continuous communication and discussions between the workers and their managers can help the managers get an overall picture, and redistribute work tasks if needed. 

The responsibility of the welfare of the organization should be placed on the managers. Depending on the size of the company, the human resource department might be in charge of the personnel issues. If the company is too small to have a specified human resource department, the management should appoint one of the managers to take care of these matters, or make sure that health issues are discussed on a regular basis during management meetings. 
The costs occurring from absenteeism can be of high amount. However, it is not an easy task to decide whether the sick leave is legitimated or not. Different companies have different policies concerning when an official certification made by a doctor is needed. If the company suffers from appreciably high levels of sick leaves, the management could even produce a regulation stating that official certifications are needed for every day an employee stays home because of sickness. The regulation could also prevent situations where the employee plans sick leaves in advance. If a part of the salary is based on provision, the motivation for illegitimated sick leaves would probably decrease. 

Many practical and concrete advices were given in the studies on the topic. The management would probably appreciate actions that can be immediately noticed by both employees and the managers themselves. Flyers with relevant information, e-mails reminding of stretch pauses and new, healthier snacks in the vending machine are examples of actions that contribute to a health promoting environment.
Collaborations with the nurses and doctors responsible for the health care of the company will most likely help the management in their endeavor to amend the health status of the employees. The nurses could for example perform health checks and other tests on a regular basis, and the doctors can provide the managers with helpful health promoting advices.

Conclusion
The aim of this paper was to provide a literature overview of studies on the topic of actions the management can take in order to reduce sick leaves, and simultaneously promote the health of the employees. It is logical that the managers have the responsibility to take health matters into consideration, as they have the power to make strategic decisions. Both first-level managers and top management can bear this responsibility. Especially smaller corporations without human resource departments should make sure that someone is taking the health factors in consideration.  
Many studies examined different kinds of interventions and other health promotion programs. Even though some studies are made over ten years ago, the content and advices in them are still relevant. There is a broad view of literature for the managers to choose from. Many of the studies not included in this paper were made during the 1980s and 1990s. The content was very similar to the studies made later on. It seems like this research field will be of great importance in the future as well. 

The studies presented in this paper showed mainly good results from the interventions and work environment changes. Even small changes will affect the workers, as long as the changes are noticeable. Examples of small changes discussed in this paper are healthier snacks, informative flyers and makeover of the stairwell. Also follow-up discussions with the mangers are small changes that do not need big preparations. An example of a bigger change would be if the company checked important health factors on the employees regularly, such as blood pressure. 
The managers would benefit from focusing on health promoting factors. Not only would the company save money from not having to hire extra personnel because of a high amount of sick leaves, the company will also gain more value from employees who are healthy and strong enough to work efficiently. Healthy employees can be seen as a means to receiving a better result, and producing more value to the owners of the company. 
A more comprehensive literature overview could include more detailed studies on background reasons for the so called “suspect sickies”. It would be interesting to see if the change of remuneration to be based on provisions would decrease the amount of absences from work. The studies could also provide solutions to the problem of employees seeing the paid sick leaves as privileges that should be imposed.

