Impairment Testing of Goodwill
Introduction
There has been a lot of research on goodwill and how goodwill is handled in the financial statements, with this paper I will try to summarize the most important findings, problems and possible solutions. In 2005 when IFRS (International Financial Reporting Standards) became obligatory for all public listed companies in the European Union there was a dramatic change in how goodwill was accounted for in the financial statements. Before IFRS, goodwill was depreciated over a certain amount of time, with IFRS goodwill is kept on the balance sheet until it becomes impaired and then the impaired amount is written down. Companies have to do the impairment tests on their goodwill once a year. This causes problems because new internally produced goodwill can make it hard to reliably estimate the value of the bought goodwill and the impairment test makes it easier for managers to manipulate the financial statements. Despite the amount of research there appears not to be any comprehensive review over the problem. A literature overview where the most important problems are reviewed and also where the possible successes of the new accounting standards are reviewed. 
There are a lot of stakeholders who use the financial statements and goodwill is a big part of the balance sheet in the financial statements of a lot of companies. It is therefore important that goodwill is accounted for in a way that gives the best and most relevant information to the stakeholders. How can the standard setters improve the current standards to better give information about the company’s financial position to stakeholders?
In the short term it may seem attractive to companies to leave doubtful impairments undone, but in the long run, this could lead to serious problems. Problems will usually appear when it starts to get worse in the economy. The decline in the economy that began in late 2007 led to the large write-downs. The study "Market turmoil and goodwill implications" by Price Waterhouse Coopers (2009) Examined Fortune 500 companies and their goodwill write-downs from the third quarter of 2008 to March 2009. During this time the companies made total write-downs of $ 230 billion, twice as much as companies’ impairment of goodwill over the last three years before 2009. Companies that do not write down their goodwill enough in a good economy have major problems in a bad economy.
 This paper will evaluate the existing academic research in this field and strive to come up with a solution as to how accounting for goodwill can be improved. This paper is organized the following way: one chapter about the theory of goodwill and how it is accounted for today according to IFRS, the literature overview and the conclusion with the results.
Goodwill
According to IFRS goodwill is the future economic benefits that can not be individually identified, nor to report separately. When IASB prepared the IFRS 3 standard on business combinations, they looked at the FASB's definition of what goodwill is. There were 6 different components examined whether they could be recognized as goodwill or not. 

The first is excess of the fair values over the value of acquired recognized net assets at acquisition time. The second was the fair values of other net assets not previously recognized. The third was the fair value of the "going concern" element on the current existing business operations. The fourth was the fair value of synergies and other benefits from combining the acquired net assets and business operations. The fifth was overvaluation of the compensation paid by the acquirer based on errors in the valuation.  
The sixth was over- or underpayment by the acquirer. 

Component 1 and 2 do not belong to goodwill on a conceptual level. Component 1 is not an asset and component 2 is not goodwill, but is included under non tangible assets when combining the businesses in the balance sheet. Component 5 and 6 are not part of goodwill, they are simply overvaluation or overpayment. Neither component is in fact even an asset so they can not be included in the balance sheet. Thus only components 3 and 4 can be considered to be goodwill.
Impairment of goodwill
Since the change to IFRS reporting in financial statements the ability for companies to make scheduled amortization of goodwill has been taken away. Instead of yearly amortization goodwill is to be valued to its fair value in the balance sheet in the financial statements. Companies should run impairment tests once a year to check that the goodwill is correctly. If it is over-valued the company shall make a write-down.
Impairment testing of goodwill
When testing if there is an impairment of an asset or not one checks that the asset's recoverable amount is equal to or greater than the asset's book value. If not, the asset must be written down. Since goodwill is split over the cash-generating units that it belongs to the testing for impairment is done at this level. When examining possible impairment of goodwill according IFRS there are three steps to follow. First, estimating the expected recoverable amount of cash-generating unit goodwill is allocated to. The second step is to calculate the value of a cash-generating unit. The value of a cash-generating unit is the higher of the fair value less costs to sell or value in use. The fair value less costs is the net price that the company would get if it were to sell the cash-generating unit. The value in use is the value of the cash-generating unit for the company in their business activities. It is not always necessary to calculate these two values. If either of these values ??exceeds the cash-generating unit's carrying value there is no impairment. If the recoverable amount is less than the carrying value of the cash-generating unit, an impairment loss is recorded. 

Literature overview
It is difficult to give an exact definition of goodwill and how it should be accounted for. Johnson and Petrone (1998), ponder over the definition of goodwill in their article. It is their view that one can examine goodwill from two different perspectives either Top-Down Perspective or Bottom-Up Perspective. In the Top-Down Perspective you treat goodwill as a component or part of a larger unit. In Bottom-Up Perspective goodwill is the sum of the components forming it.
When considering goodwill in general terms, one could imagine that the goodwill is the portion of the price paid in excess of the acquired asset's book value. The components that goodwill may consist of are according Johnson and Petrone the same six components that IFRS uses. 
As the IFRS definition of goodwill Johnson & Petrone also define goodwill as components 3 & 4. In other words going concern and synergies are the only aspects of goodwill that are considered “core goodwill”. The conclusion of this is that IFRS has defined goodwill very close to the Bottom-Up Perspective from Johnson & Petrones article.
Henning et al. (2000) did an empirical study published in the Journal of Accounting Research where they examined how the market behaved towards the various identifiable components of goodwill. The empirical study was done by studying 1576 acquisitions between 1990 and 1994. The information for the survey was taken from the Securities Data Company U.S. Mergers and Acquisitions database. The acquisitions were of an average value of $ 319 million while the acquired company's book value was an average of $ 100 million. The study concluded that investors have both positive and negative thoughts of goodwill. The markets reacted positively to the goodwill components of synergies from the combination of business activities and "going concern". While markets reacted negatively to the components of goodwill that can not be considered assets on the company's balance sheet under current reporting standards. Components that the market reacted negatively to could lead to adverse developments in the company's market value. Based on this it can be argued that Johnson and Petrone (1998) model also works in the real world.


Problems with impairment testing
According to IFRS goodwill is a non-wasting asset. A big part of goodwill may consist of synergy benefits that over time and due to changes in the environment might behave as a wasting asset and not as a non-wasting asset. This can lead to problems. Schultze (2005) examines this in his article. Schultze says that because goodwill can have both properties. The impairment testing actually needs a mixture of depreciation and amortization. Since the losses may be assumed to be non-recurring losses while depreciation suggests that depreciation of the value will be repeated during the time that the company uses the asset. Shultze also writes that it is only the portion of the goodwill impairment charge that is in excess of what should be written off as likely impairment and therefore a non-recurring expenditure. This part should be investigated so that investors and the analysts can hold managers responsible for the loss. Schultze also mentions that in successful companies, it is not always necessary to write down the goodwill as it should be. The reason for this is if management is able to manufacture new internally generated goodwill that replaces the impaired bought goodwill. This provides a misleading picture to investors because it is forbidden to have internally generated goodwill as an asset on the balance sheet.
Conclusion
