Discursive strategies used in strategy making for a municipality
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the process of strategy creation and decision making has been examined from several viewpoints (Minzberg, Ahlstrand and Lampell, 2005, more references needed). How strategy is created and understood in the organizations has been discussed and studied from different viewpoints (ref.). (SOME OF THE DIFFERENT STRATEGY VIEWPOINTS HERE) The focus has been on the importance of how strategy is understood in organizations and how organizational members participate in the creation of strategy (Mantere & Vaara, 2008). Further, studies have been carried out on how to bring the strategy creation process closer to the people in organizations (Whittington, XXXX). As studies on how change in organizations have come about (e.g. Gioia & Chittipeddi, 1991), more focus has been put on the role of language and narrative constructions of language in organizations, and during organizational change (e.g. Barry & Elmes, 1997). Barry and Elmes (1997: 430) state that “strategy must rank as one of the most prominent, influential and costly stories told in organizations,” and thus, studies on how these stories are created, and what the role of language in the stories told,  have become important.
During recent years much attention has been paid to the role of language and of rhetorics in the creation of strategy (Suddaby & Greenwood, 2005; Vaara, Sorsa and Pälli, 2010, Samara-Friedricks, 2003). The importance of these studies is well brought out by Samara-Friedericks (2003: 142) when stated “More recently, though, there has been a growing recognition of the need to get ‘beyond the narrowness of each school [referring to Minzbergs 10 schools of strategy]: we need to know how strategy formation, which combines all these schools and more, really works’ (Minzberg and Lampel, 1999: 29).” Still, there are only a few studies on how the strategy is formulated in organizations on micro-level (Samara-Fredricks, 2003). The micro-level process provides us an opportunity to look at how the strategy decisions in organizations are made, and how the conclusions to a decisions is made. Even though top managers are said to create the strategy, by examining the mico-level processes and discussions in the strategy decision making, we are able to see what the impact of other members in the organizations actually is. Further we are able to examine how different rhetorical strategies, ways of presenting, and communication with each other may lead to different outcomes in meetings. 
The aim of this study is to look at what are the rhetorical tools used in meetings during the strategy decision process. The strategies used in the meetings add up to different strategies that the members in the meeting uses to get their “voice” heard or their ideas supported in the organization. In order to examine the strategies, or discursive strategies used in meetings, we are studying strategy texts from strategy meetings in a municipality in Finland. It has been noted that discursive strategies are used in these meetings, and therefore, it is motivated to look at these texts in order to find different strategies that the participants in the meetings use to get heard and the determine the direction of the discussons taking place. The idea, is to carefully look at how the discussions develop and how new ideas come about, and then from there try to determine categories that explain the strategies used in these kinds of meetings in order to impact on the flow of the discussions but also in order to get your voice heard. The strategies are ways of legitimating the ideas in the meetings (Suddaby & Greenwood, 2005). By studying meetings and searching for these discursive strategies in order to legitimize ideas, we hope to better understand how strategies come about and how the stories told in organizations that create meaning for the people in the organizations come about. 
Here a part describing the different parts of the paper, as well as what they contain. 
LITTERATURE REVIEW (0,5-1 page)
The research within strategy is more and more moving towards a narrative approach on strategy (Barry & Elmes, 1997) as well as the participation of organizational members in the strategy creation process (Mantere & Vaara, 2008). Barry and Elmes (1997) focuses on the narrative constructions of stories told in organizations. They are specially interested in the stories on strategy that are told in the organizations and what the impact of these stories are on how the strategy is understood and realized in the organizations (Barry & Elmes, 1997). By understanding the narratives present in organizations, we are able to understand how the strategies come about, and how they are created. As the narrative approach is a part of the sensemaking and sensegiving in organizations (Gioia & Chittipeddi, 1991), they contrite to how the strategies decided upon are created. As strategy decision making is traditionally viewed as something of the top management to do (Johnson, Scholes & Whittington, 2008), it is no wonder, that how they understand and make sense of the organization has an impact on how the strategies are created.  
In recent years, researchers have pointed out the importance of language and rhetoric’s in the creation process of strategy (Vaara, 2010? Taking the linguistic turn seriously). It has also become important important to understand how strategy comes about in organizations (Suddaby & Greenwood, 2005; Vaara, Sorsa & Pälli, 2010). In Samara Fredricks (2003) it is noted that in order for us to understand how strategies come about, and how the discussions on the strategy decisions develop during these meetings, micro-level analysis on strategy meetings are requires. Still, few studies on micro-level on this topic has so far been made (Samara-Fredericks, 2003). 
Studies made on mico-level contribute to the understanding on how the strategy is created. By looking at the micro-level process, we are able to indentify different strategies on how to get your voice heard and how to affect on how the discussions developer and the decision making process. When identifying these strategies, we are able to actually see, what is going on, how the ones involved in the decision making base their decisions one and which strategies that are present and used. By indentifying these strategies, we are able to see which things has an impact and an role in legitimating the decisions. By understanding how the decisions made are legitimated, we can understand the role of different actors and the importance and presence of these actors in the meetings. If e.g. one of the participants in the meetings often refer to discussions with middle managers and other members of the organization in order to legitimize his or her idea, it can be seen as a way to get your voice heard but you can also notice, that the members voices are heard in the meetings when making decisions upon strategy and thus, one may also notice, that the participation of members is an important issue in the organization, as it provide a base for getting your voice heard in meetings on strategy. (search for references)
The micro-level studies provide us the possibility to look at what really goes on in meetings where decisions concerning the organizations strategies are made. We can actually see the things that affect on how the discussions develop and what the impact on different discursive strategies in these meetings has on the outcome of the decisions made. Further, by identifying the different strategies used in these meetings, we are actually able to see what the role of the different parts in the organizations is in the process of deciding upon strategy. (look for references)
Based on this, it can be noted that the micro-level studies on discursive strategies during meetings deciding upon strategy is motivated.  By looking deeper at what actually goes on in these meetings, and comparing the different strategies that the strategists use in the meetings, we are able to understand what the impact of the different actors in the organization has on the creation process of strategy. By understanding which of the discursive strategies that are used and how they affect the decision making, we can actually see how different things participate in the decisions made and also how these might develop over time. By looking at the meetings on micro level, we are able to contribute, not only to the studies mare within rhetoric’s in meetings and strategies on how to get “your voice heard” in meeting, but also contribute to the studies on how much the members of an organization actually are able to participate in the creation of strategies, as well as to the research on how the strategies are realized in organizations. (REFERENCES)
Look in final version that you answer these questions: Look through the articles, what has been previously done, what are you doing, why? Are there strategies that you can use? are there meetings information that you can use? how will this help the research done so far? why does Strategy formulation matter? Why how to formulate strategies matter (vaara & Mantere participation).  strategy something of the strategists or something of others as well? How is the strategy important, why are these meetings important? does it matter how the strategy discussions take place? they are blur and they are confusing, so it might actually make a difference in what decisions are made, depending on the effect an impact of the strategies used in meetings
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK/METHOD 
return to this. How will the meetings be looked at? how will you determine the strategies? how will you measure which strategy is used more and which not. how will you compare 2009 and 2010 strategies used? why these meetings?
Why look at the ones doing the strategy and not the ones implementing and doing the strategy decided at top. Now in the process of going through ways of determining the strategies, understanding the role of rhetoric’s, looking at the meetings and why only look at how the discussion develops and not the issues as such. The idea is to motivate why it is important to look at the strategies not the issues discussed, as well as finding ways to measure how the different strategies are used, which strategies are used the most and which strategies less. Also the idea is to measure, how the usage of these strategies change over time, if they change. 
MATERIAL 
Lahti data gathered from meeting during 2005-2011. Return to this once the decision on which meetings to code is made, depending on the theories and measurement tools that are used. At this point, the idea is to look at approximately 5 meetings, from 2009 and 2010 that are within the same context but different time, in oder to look at which strategies they involve, and if therr has happened a change in which strategies are most present. 
ANALYSIS 
What’s going on? What can I find? “Snipits” from the meeting, table explaining and clarifying the strategies I determine and find. 
DISCUSSION 

CONCLUSIONS 

