GREEN PURCHASING

Introduction
Environmental issues have received continuous attention and immediate interest from general public recently. These issues are discussed among various fields, including supply chain management and purchasing activities. Efficient purchasing strategies are relevant when aiming for minimized costs and improvements in quality. In fact, purchasing is one of the most important functions in supply chain management. According to Watts, Kim & Khan (1995:3) the purchasing function has not been seen as such an important function before, as managers generally have considered it rather a low level function. Looking at the situation from an environmental or “greener” perspective has attracted attention recently as it is characteristics of these days to take environmental aspects into account beside cost saving and maximizing revenues etc. Trends seem to show that companies and other institutions focus continuously more on these kinds of questions, which makes research in the field important. Research elucidates how purchasing strategies can be carried out in a more eco-friendly fashion and what the effects of greener purchasing strategies are, as well as what the factual benefits for the companies themselves are, and how to overcome the possible challenges and difficulties. 

There are few studies concerning green purchasing, even though it is a current topic. However, Min & Galle (1997) have taken up such features as reduction and elimination of waste in purchasing, facts that may reshape supplier selection, the effects of green purchasing as well as they have stated some guidelines for companies. Also Murray (2000) has written about a case concerning effects from green purchasing and has observed that proactive emphasis on environmental impacts may lead to improved competitiveness. Murray (2000) has also stated that there are yet few cases available in this area. Another interesting article by Min &Galle (2001) concerning the topic is a survey on green purchasing practices of US companies examining the types of companies involved in the field and the reasons for the companies' involvement. 

Min & Galle (2001) states that companies get involved in green purchasing mainly because of regulations, which might have been the case at that time but now it is believable and expected that there could be other relevant reasons found as well. It is also stated by the same authors that green purchasing is seen more as a cost than a profit center, which needs to be examined as it is supposed that green purchasing has a positive effect on the company and for instance provides a competitive advantage. Many articles covering green purchasing provide information about waste elimination when discussing this topic but normally not much else beyond this is discussed. There are probably additional aspects to be identified as well that are linked to green purchasing except waste management. 

Aim and research question
The aim of this paper is to provide information about the benefits from green purchasing and to identify how it is done and the reasons why companies engage in it. Doing business in a more eco-friendly fashion provides companies with a positive image, but the main purpose with this study is to bring to light what the real benefits are for companies. This means for instance how it is possible for companies to minimize costs and maximize revenues, efficiency and sales, to name a few.

Although there has been some research done in the field already there are still unclear issues. Information on purchasing in general is unproblematic to find, but information about purchasing strategies in a more eco-friendly fashion is generally still limited and focusing mainly on small parts and not necessarily providing sufficiently coverable information. Furthermore, it would be interesting to investigate whether green purchasing leads to a competitive advantage and to what extent, as well as what an environmentally friendly approach in practice contributes to the companies. 

Structure
This paper will have the following structure: first discussed are purchasing strategies in general and linked facts. Afterwards the environmental/green perspective is examined including challenges, benefits, difficulties and reasons for engagement. Examining these features should result in a representative presentation of those aspects. Subsequently, companies applying greener standards in their purchasing functions will be discussed, including the types of companies that actually apply these standards more than others.  By discussing these aspects, the purpose is to fill the gaps mentioned above, and to explain the linked issues.

Background of the strategic purchasing function
The area of purchasing strategies has received more and more attention and interest during the last decades. Previously this function within companies and their supply chains has not received that much interest. (Ellram & Carr, 1994: 10). Purchasing has been seen more as a low ranked function far from being counted in as an important function in the concept of competitive strategy.  Generally there has been shallow information containing facts primarily about basic aspects such as “…the number of suppliers [] pricing strategies [] organization structure [] and other operating level policies”.  (Watts, Kim & Khan, 1995: 3-4). 

A short historical review supports the statement above. In the beginning of the 1970s´ it was recognized that purchasing was more of a passive function. At that time it was asserted that purchasing was more of an administrative function than a strategic one. Some years later Porter identified that buyers and suppliers do have an effect on companies´ competitiveness. Eventually this led to increased interest for purchasing as a strategic function, even though the development was still quite slow. It took as late as until the 1990s´ before the purchasing function was integrated as a considerable function with remarkable influence on the companies´ result. (Ellram & Carr, 1994: 11) 

Purchasing as a competitive strategy
When discussing supply chains and analyzing a company´s performance and success, it is essential to include the purchasing function. According to Watts, Kim & Hahn (1995:3) 55 % of the total cost of production originates from the purchasing function. This indicates the importance of having efficient purchasing strategies. The importance of sourcing and supplier selection is relevant and the suppliers have a wide impact on aspects such as delivery and quality. A company’s performance, profitability and success are directly linked to purchasing. (Watts, Kim & Hahn, 1995:3-4)

Purchasing activities
Aspects influencing the purchasing activity are reviewed and explained briefly below in order to clarify what green purchasing is based on. The same aspects are considered in green purchasing but they are carried out in a more eco-friendly manner, paying attention and aiming for more environmentally conscious activities.

Supplier identification, evaluation and selection are significant matters when planning the purchasing strategy. Supplier relationships must be created and when good suppliers are found the relationship must be maintained. Relevant issues to consider when selecting suppliers are lead-time, delivery performance, possibility to react quickly and price etc. There are often partnerships of various degrees to the suppliers. Some suppliers are more important than others and therefore some partnerships are deeper and the cooperation and collaboration are further developed. The purchasing strategy varies depending on the items that are to be purchased. It might concern raw material, different components, equipment for various purposes or services, to name a few. (Grant et al., 2006: 100-103) 

Green purchasing
Environmental issues have during recent years gained wide attention and concern. This phenomenon is reflected all over our society from different angles. The concern is not merely a concern among individuals but also an issue for governments, companies, industries and the society in general.

Green purchasing vs. green supply chain management
Green supply chain management (GSCM) is more commonly occurring and a broader concept than green purchasing. GSCM takes the whole supply chain including all its functions into account. Green purchasing on the other hand is one of the separate functions in the supply chain. This paper concentrates on the purchasing function and therefore the green supply chain management concept will not be covered. GSCM is defined below in order to clarify the differences between the terms.

The definition of green supply chain management is the following:
"integrating environmental thinking into supply-chain management, including product design, material sourcing and selection, manufacturing processes, delivery of the final product to the consumers as well as end-of-life management of the product after its useful life" (Srivastara, 2007:3)

The definition presents the entire supply chain and points out that it includes material sourcing and selection, which indicates that purchasing is one part of green supply chain management. While the entire supply chain is involved and explained as a process with many functions linked to each other, green purchasing is instead delimited and concentrates on the purchasing function and its features. A general definition for green purchasing is provided by Min & Galle (2001):

"an environmentally-conscious purchasing practice that reduces sources of waste and promotes recycling and reclamation of purchased materials without adversely affecting performance requirements of such materials." (Min & Galle 2001: 1223)

Green purchasing activities
Aspects that are taken into consideration when striving for greener purchasing are the aim for generating less waste and purchasing as well as usage of material that is produced from raw materials that are more environmentally friendly compared to other alternatives. Another remarkable activity is to avoid hazardous materials as much as possible in order to avoid hazardous waste. Succeeding in those activities requires contribution and cooperation with suppliers. (Rao & Hult, 2005:3)

The main activities in green purchasing are careful supplier selection, source reduction, waste elimination and green packaging. Supplier selection is one major issue for facilitating green purchasing. Factors having an effect on supplier choice are liability, cost in terms of disposal of dangerous material, and fulfillment of valid regulations. Also the suppliers´ overall environmental dedication plays an important role. (Min & Galle, 1997: 12-13).

Source reduction can be achieved for instance by putting recycling and reuse into practice. By purchasing smaller volumes of materials that are damaging to the environment or cutting down the overall use of dangerous raw material, a company can achieve source reduction. This can also be achieved if suppliers are asked to use as little packaging materials as possible and preferably use only returnable packages.  Reuse might appear to be somewhat problematic, as the reusable item must be robust and lasting and therefore is not applicable to all items. Examples on reusable items are pallets, cardboards and paper, to name a few. (Min & Galle, 1997: 13).

Waste elimination is carried out by scrapping and dumping, sorting nontoxic incineration and recyclable packaging. Waste elimination is though rarely used compared to source reduction. Green packaging is absolutely a preferable activity but it might also be a remarkable challenge. It might be hard to use as little packaging material as possible while the shipped products need to be protected from damages during transportation. (Min & Galle, 1997: 13-14).
 
Commitment to green purchasing

Incorporation of purchasing guidelines into the ISO 14000 standard
ISO 14000 is a standard series providing guidelines for environmental management systems. The guidelines provide information on how to achieve reduced costs and inspiration for developing sustainable solutions when designing green and clean solutions. By applying this standard, a company may gain competitive advantage, which pleases both the company (and shareholders) as well as other stakeholders.  (Chen, 2004: 927)  

This standard does not include guidelines for purchasing strategies, but Chen (2004) emphasizes the importance of including green purchasing into the standard. Incorporation of green purchasing into the standard would result in improvements in environmentally friendly production including purchased materials and waste management. An increasing number of firms are adopting the ISO 14001 standard and have decided to use the standard as a requirement when choosing suppliers. This external pressure both encourages and forces the suppliers to adopt the standard. (Chen, 2004:927-928)  

Incorporation of purchasing into this standard would result in improved green purchasing strategies within all these companies (and their suppliers) adopting ISO 14000. (Chen, 2004: 932)  

Commonly addressed obstacles and benefits
Min and Galle (1997) states that the most common obstacles to green purchasing are first of all cost issues and issues related to revenues. Implementation of environmental programs is usually experienced as very costly. Further the recycling systems and reuse are experienced as unprofitable, which makes it difficult to identify essential economic benefits and genuinely believe that green purchasing is profitable for the company. It is also difficult to measure the benefits and costs related to green purchasing. (Min & Galle, 1997: 15-16)

Despite these obstacles and difficulties connected with green purchasing there are positive aspects as well. The positive aspects recognized are decreased costs associated with reduction in the amount of disposal and liability costs. Additional drivers for green purchasing are the possibility for preservation of resources and the positive image a company gain from applying greener activities. (Min & Galle, 1997:15)

Environmental purchasing contributes to a competitive advantage? 
According to Carter, Kale & Grimm (2000), environmental regulations on purchasing is the second largest concern for purchasing managers. There are disagreements whether green purchasing activities have a positive impact on a company´s performance or not, i.e. does it result in improved economic performance or is it a matter resulting only in larger costs. Carter et al. (2000) states that green purchasing might result in a positive impact on firm performance and therefore managers should emphasize these matters more. (Carter, Kale & Grimm, 2000: 2, 7)

Positive effects on firm performance can be achieved for instance by usage of recycled packaging. Recycled materials are offered to a low price, as there have been remarkable improvements in reverse logistics during the last few years. Light packaging is another aspect that may contribute to decreased costs, both when it comes to packaging and transportation costs. It is still essential to ensure that the packaging accomplishes its purpose, as insufficient packaging might result in damaged items during transportation. Involvement in product design enables efficient recycling, reuse and disassembly. Further aspects to consider are life-cycle analysis as well as committing the suppliers in environmental activities. (Carter, Kale & Grimm, 2000:7)

Rao & Holt (2005) supports the statement concerning the fact that green activities enable reductions in costs, improved sales and larger market shares. Accomplishing these benefits supports better profits and therefore better economic performance for the company. When waste is eliminated and resources utilized as much as possible, also the costs for disposal are minimized resulting in improvements in the economic performance. This means that reuse and recycling of material is the key to competitive advantage and improvements in performance.   Rao & Holt (2005, 910-912)

According to Hamner (2006) green purchasing has already become fairly common when speaking of larger companies. In these companies, the activity has gained status of being included in the company’s fundamental strategy. (Hamner, 2006:25)

Experiences from green purchasing
Experiences from US firms
A survey conducted on US firms concerning their green purchasing experiences provides information about aspects having an impact on the firms´ behavior and commitment to green purchasing. Variables that impact green purchasing implementation are presented as well as how the strategies are linked to supplier selection, waste management and packaging.  (Min & Galle, 2001: 1222)

According to the survey, the pattern is that companies purchasing large quantities are more involved in green purchasing. It is also assumed that these firms inspect their potential suppliers´ dedication to environmental issues. This is possible as large firms have great opportunities to get competitive deals in any case. It was also shown that firms taking environmental regulations more seriously are more active in environmental issues than other firms. This fact speaks for the argument that regulations and laws are the main reasons for companies to involve in environmental issues and implementing greener strategies in their operations. Consequently the main reason for greener activities is not generally long-term goals; these activities are rather more as a cost than something you possibly gain from. (Min & Galle, 2001: 1231, 1233)

It was also identified that companies that are convinced that recycling contributes to savings, involve and educate their employees in order to make the recycling and reusing process more efficient. This involves providing information about what kind of items are recyclable or reusable and how these items should be treated. Information and education are prerequisites for potential savings from green purchasing. If the system is not efficient enough, it would probably result in costs rather than savings. (Min & Galle, 2001: 1233)

The most prevalent hindrance to green purchasing is costs originating from investments in “…environmental programs, uneconomic recycling, and uneconomic reusing” (Min & Galle, 2001:1235). Especially for smaller firms it is more or less impossible to afford such investments. The survey proves that involvement in green purchasing is rarer for smaller firms. Finally, it is stated that support from top management is a prerequisite for the implementation of green purchasing programs. There is still lack of tools for the measurement of environmental costs, which makes it difficult to estimate what the effects are. Estimations and planning are often the first step before incorporating new strategies. According to the survey factors such as lack of environmental consciousness, economic issues, investments as well as insufficient environmental regulations have remarkable impact on firms´ involvement in green purchasing activities. (Min & Galle, 2001:1235).

The Belfast example of improved supplier involvement
Purchasing strategies and green purchasing are functions that are often related to business and companies. Therefore it is important to remember that also governments and governmental organizations are involved and have these kinds of issues on their agenda as well. The Belfast City Council for instance decided to implement greener purchasing strategies for gaining improved environmental performance but also to encourage local competitiveness.  (Murray, 2000:38)

Potential suppliers were first of all compared and screened. By arranging “the supply chain challenge” and workshops, suppliers were informed about green strategies. They were encouraged to operate in a more eco- friendly manner by using only recycled print paper etc. The participating suppliers´ progresses were followed up and audits were conducted.

This resulted in involvement and improved consciousness among all participators in these kinds of issues. Several suppliers made remarkable improvements as they became aware of how to operate in an environmentally friendly manner. (Murray, 2000:41)

This case shows that taking responsibility for proper education for the suppliers and continuous commitment gives positive results, no matter if it is a company or a governmental organization taking these actions.

Discussion

Conclusions