The firm internationalization process- proceeding from a stage approach towards a global approach?
1. Introduction

In today’s globalized world, numerous products sold at the local grocery store originate from outside our national borders. For example the bestselling peanut butter on the top shelf comes from the US but is produced in Estonia where as the trendy garden tools are Japanese but manufactured in South Korea. How did the peanut butter respectively trendy garden tools end up for sale at your local grocery store?

Due to external factors such as globalization, outsourcing and virtual economy, among others, companies are pushed and motivated to approach global markets in ways differing from the more traditional stage model (Oviatt & McDougall, 1994). 

The stage approach of firm internationalization states that company’s start selling their product in their home market, in order to minimize risk and uncertainty, from where they then go abroad when the product has matured. Raymond Vernon’s Product life Cycle theory (1966) first introduced in 1966 has been crucial in describing the stage approach. The other possible approach for firms internationalizing is doing so right from the beginning, a global approach in other words. In this case foreign markets are entered at once for both sourcing and exporting (Anderson et al., 2004).

The aim of this study is to analyze and discuss whether there is a model for internalization processes that firms follow. Emphasis will be placed on both the stage approach and global approach to internationalization with focus to seven factors presented by Baronchelli and Cassia (2008), which compel companies in today’s world to conform to the global approach. The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: first the main concepts, stage approach with a focus on Vernon’s product life cycle theory and the global approach focusing on the phenomena “born global” are presented. Next, the applicability of Vernon’s theory today is discussed. This is followed by presenting Baronchelli’s and Cassia’s (2008) analysis of the main factors driving start up companies to enter global markets. A comparison of the two approaches will then presented. Finally, a conclusion and implications of the study will be presented.
2. The Stage approach

The stage approach refers to firms proceeding from selling a new product in the home market to enter new markets one at a time when the product matures. A primary stage approach model is the Product Life Cycle Theory by Raymond Vernon (1966), which explains the internationalization patterns of firms. According to the theory a new technologically advanced product is introduced and manufactured for high-income takers in the home market. As the product matures and consumer demand rises from other advanced countries, manufacturing gradually shifts abroad. When the product has turned in to a commodity, production shifts to less developed countries, from where the product then is imported to more advanced countries. 

Raymond Vernon’s (1966) Product Life Cycle Theory consists of three stages:

1. NEW PRODUCT
According to Vernon (1966) US producers are most likely to be the first ones to introduce a new, innovative, and technologically advanced product for high-income consumers in the home market. The US high-income consumers are characterized by low price elasticity and are willing to experiment with new, expensive products. Although manufacturing of a new product would be more cost-effective abroad, production facilities are located in the home market in order to minimize risk and uncertainty. Another determining localization factor is flexibility, which is needed when experimenting with optimal methods of manufacturing. During the introduction face the need for flexibility and geographical proximity weighs in heavier than small cost advantages, given that the product is not yet standardized. (Vernon 1979)

2. MATURING PRODUCT
Exports to markets in advanced countries further increase through time and the need for flexibility is reduced, when the increased demand makes the production process more stable. This makes it economically possible to start local production in the advanced countries. Foreign investments in production plants drive down the unit costs, since labor and transportation costs decrease. These production facilities are meant to serve local markets, which substitutes exports from the firms home market. At this stage, production still needs high skilled and high paid employees. When the product matures, lower income countries will start placing export orders. (Vernon 1979)

3. STANDARDIZED PRODUCT
During the product standardization phase, production facilities will start relocating to countries with lower incomes, allowing cost savings.  Relocating to countries with lower incomes is usually to counter price competition or to meet increased local demand. At this stage the new production facilities also serve the demand from foreign markets, including the initial production market. In other words, firms will maximize production to low-wage countries since capital and labor can be moved around, but labor cannot. (Vernon 1979)

In 1979 Vernon reconsidered his product life cycle theory by stating that many of the critical assumptions of the theory were weakened or did not hold any more, the economical differences between advanced countries had significantly reduced with time and the geographical reach of firms had increased. However, Vernon pointed out that the theory continued to explain and predict a certain category of foreign direct investments (Vernon 1979).
3. The Global Approach

The global approach is another model used to explain the internationalization process of firms. The phenomena of starting international activities from the start, by entering multiple countries at once and approaching new markets for both export and sourcing, is due to new external conditions, such as market conditions becoming more global, new developments in transportation and communication technologies, and the increasing amount of people with international experience (Madsen & Servais, 1997).
The Mckinsely consultants introduced the concept of “born global” firms in 1993 in a survey for the Australian Manufacturing Council. For the survey 310 emerging exporters answered a questionnaire from which 56 were interviewed. The survey distinguished two types of exporters, the domestic-based firms and the born global firms.

The domestic based firms, including 75 % of the companies, were well established in the home market with fair market share and stable finances. These firms primary focused on the home market and had many years of experience, but saw exporting as their best chance to expand (Rasmussen & Madsen 2002). On average the firms had been in business for 27 years before starting to export, which counted for 20 % of their sales (Branochelli & Cassia 2008).

The Global firms - 25% of the group – typically started exporting 2 years after they were founded. In this case exports counted for 76 % of sales. Although the firms were young they successfully competed with larger multinational companies, having a total exports accounting to approximately 20 %. The born global firms normally compete in niche markets, are both flexible, adaptable, move fast, and have innovative technology and product design. (Branochelli & Cassia 2008)

Rasmussen and Madsen (2002) conclude that a major factor for the success of born global firms is not because they manage to develop standardized products but the firms’ ability to standardize marketing, production etc. in a global niche. Another possible reason to the success of these firms is the commitment managers have to internationalization (McKinsey & Co., 1993).
4. The Product Life Cycle in a new global context

Raymond Vernon (1979) stated 23 years after he first introduced the Product life cycle that some of the crucial assumptions may not hold any more because income differences between advanced nations had dropped significantly, the geographical reach of many firms had increased fundamentally, and competitors had become able to imitate products quicker than previously envisioned. However, Vernon states that the model is still valid as a guide to behavior for companies intending to internationalize. Furthermore, according to Vernon, the model can still be applicable to smaller firms, which are yet to create an international network of manufacturing subsidies. In other words, the model helps companies at the beginning of their international expansion or companies with products that require experimentation in order to understand how the competitive surroundings change over time. The model is suggested to be used in international marketing for product planning purposes. (ProvenModels 2011)

Another factor that speaks on behalf of Vernon’s model is that for a new product to succeed there has to be a market ready, a capable industry, and capital or labor available to make a new product succeed. Thus, newly invented products foster in advanced countries where as less advanced countries focus on adapting existing products in order to create the product for a lower price. However, this argument does not take in to account the product’s production path, from introduction to maturity.  Due to the simplicity of the model it is also difficult to determine in what phase a product is in the life cycle, and thus it is hard to use as a predictive model, which could help anticipate change. (ProvenModels 2011) 
5. Factors affecting the choice of a Global approach

There are multiple factors that affect start up companies to choose a global approach from the beginning. Branochelli and Cassia (2008) state that start up companies are compelled from their inception to enter foreign markets, due to globalization of demand and supply. Branochelli and Cassia have identified the following 7 factors as the main reasons driving companies to become born global.
5.1. Uncertainty and dynamism in the firm’s environment
Due to the changes in the external environment, the conditions for born-global companies have become favorable during the past couple of decades  (Rasmussen & Madssen 2002). Madsen and Servais (1997) have identified three main changes in favor of born global firms; internationalization of financial markets, increased global sourcing and diffusion of more niche markets due to larger magnitude of specialization in the final markets. Other changes leading to better conditions for born globals suggested by Rasmussen and Madsen (2002) are deregulations and privatizations, faster information flows, improved communication and transportation networks, free movement of capital goods, services etc.
5.2. The home market
The size of the home market plays an important role in a company’s decision to go for the born global approach. The domestic demand being too small is one of the most crucial factors leading to rapid internationalization of firms (Freeman et al., 2006).  This can be related to the stage approach described by Vernon (1966) where companies expand abroad as a result of the home markets demands being statured. Madsen and Servais (1997) also state that countries with smaller domestic markets are more likely to be born global, than countries with greater domestic markets. According to Vernon (1966) there has to be a trigger for companies to expand abroad. On the other hand, for born global firms the domestic market is not as important as in the stage approach, since the born globals are not limited to their domestic market but instead consider the world as one market (Chetty & Cambell-Hunt, 2004)
5.3. Industry and segment
Industry characteristics, especially the industry structure can be a determining factor for start-up companies to become born global (Fernhaber et al., 2007) Especially start-ups in the high-technology industry and their internationalization behavior has been the focus of many studies (Branochelli & Cassia, 2008). It is considered that the reason behind the rapid internalization of firms operating in high-technology based industries is that they are compelled to do so before the technology is obsolescence or imitated (Andersson et al., 2004). An alternative way to look at it is that firms owning unique technology create a competitive advantage and are thus driven to rapid internationalization.
Fernhaber et al (2007) have concluded that a firm operating in an industry going through a growth stage, exhibits a medium-level of concentration, attracts a higher level of venture capital, is knowledge intensive and is integrated at a global level is more likely to internationalize, regardless of the firm technological level.
5.4. Knowledge availability 
Both in the stage approach and global approach, the importance of knowledge and experience is crucial when it comes to firm internalization. Firms need to increase their knowledge concerning foreign markets before expanding abroad, this by having previous experimental experience of expanding to foreign market (Johanson & Vahlne 1977). Gaining experience and experimental knowledge takes time, and firms born global do not follow this pattern. However, Laanti et al (2007) state that experience and experimental knowledge can be acquired through the founders’ and managers’ personal knowledge or alternatively through interaction and sharing knowledge with local and international networks. 
5.5. Entrepreneur and management previous experience
Chetty and Cambell-Hunt (2004) argue that a reason for firms going for the global approach over  the stage approach is the founder’s level of education, work experience, and experience from living abroad. It is also pointed out that managers today are more educated and have more international experience than in the 1970’s when the stage approach was first developed (Andersson et al., 2004). People with prior international experience, business networks and a large group of international employees are more likely to create born globals firms (Madsen & Servais 1997). 
5.6. Firm’s innovativeness and innovation skills
“Innovativeness refers to the firm’s capacity to generate new ideas, products and services for foreign markets and its determination to develop creative solution to challenges it faces.” (Branochelli and Cassia, 2008). The relation between born global start-ups and innovation has been analyzed broadly. According to Freeman et al (2006) innovativeness, proactive and risk taking, which are part of the organizational culture, make successful born global firms. Laanti et al (2006) on the other hand state that the reason for creating a born global is the main innovation, which is often developed before the firm is established. Founders’ experience and entrepreneurial spirit are strongly related with the firm innovativeness.
5.7. Network links 
Crucial resources for start-ups to become internationally successful are networks and partnerships (Chetty & Cumpbell-Hunt 2004). Madsen and Servais (1997) argue that an internationalization process cannot be built in isolation, but instead the environmental conditions and networks in which the firm is active, need to be analysed. Laanti et al. (2007) stress the need for networks for born global firms and further state that activity links and resource ties have a large impact on start up firms’ rapid expansion. Broad networks allow firms to access “complementary social, technical and commercial resources in R&D, technology, production, marketing and distribution areas that would take individual companies years to accumulate on their own” (Laanti et al., 2007). 
6. Stage Approach vs. Global Approach

Chetty et al (2004) conducted a case research of 16 successfully internationalized New Zealand firms. The research was conducted in the mid-1980s both before and after forces of globalization became in evident in the country. The study results suggest that many of the factors distinguishing the born global internationalization path also characterize the stage approach to internationalization, by entering Australia, an advanced nation, which is also the closest neighboring country. From there on out further internationalization, however, occurred according to the born global model: to capitalize on the potential of an innovative product firms rapidly entered multiple markets using extensive network links. (Chetty et al., 2004) 

The results imply that the stage approach and the global approach do not automatically disclose each other but instead the study provides mixed support for both approaches. The earlier phases in firm internationalization, the regional localization, conforms to the stage approach, where as the later stages and processes are characteristic of born global firms (Chetty et al., 2004). It is also to be noted that both of the models stress many of the same internal and external factors, crucial for firm internationalization. Factors such as home market, knowledge availability, management experience, and innovation are highly important for firms wanting to internationalize. 

Vernon stated already in 1979 that some of the critical assumptions of the product life cycle might no longer hold because of changes in the external environment changes. However, the stage approach is still valid, according to Vernon, as a guide for firms wanting to internationalize. Globalization of demand and supply surely has lead start-up companies to expand in to foreign markets more rapidly, however this is not always the case. In the McKinsely survey for the Australian Manufacturing Council 75 % were so called domestic based firms that had on average been 27 years in business before starting to export. These firms did not follow the global approach of born globals, but instead had common characteristics of both the stage approach and the global approach.

7. Conclusions and further research
Yet to be written
-There is no clear model that firms follow, the stage approach has explainatory power and can be used as a guide but the global approach more up-to date
-External and internal factors leading to internationalization (the 7 factors)
-Recall for further empirical testing focusing on firm internationalization paths in industries that are more or less exposed to the competitive pressure of globalization.



 

