THE EFFECT OF DIFFERENT PRODUCT RANGES ON CONSUMER BEHAVIOR

Introduction
  
Consumer behavior has been a central topic for researchers during the last decades. An
industry where research on this topic is very relevant is grocery shopping, a daily
activity nearly every adult can relate to. With an increasing amount of products and
locations this previously simple routine has presented itself with immense variations.
Flour, milk, and other necessities can today be found in various packages with different
attributes in different locations. Simultaneously prices can vary from store to store. A
key-character for the firms to maintain competitiveness presented in previous research
is product differentiation (Piana, 2003). The concept of differentiation can be related to
product ranges since it is a way for stores to differentiate themselves from competition.
Large supermarkets have clearly different product ranges than small local grocery
stores. This paper contributes to the understanding of consumer behavior in relation to
different product ranges.


As competition emerges with rapid pace, firms become increasingly dependent on
consumer behavior research. This is evident in the grocery market. Many cities and
even small towns have large numbers of grocery stores and supermarkets. The apparent
difference between the two might be related to areal size but an even more important
one is the difference in the respective product ranges. Needless to say, consumers would
not frequent in both kinds of stores with the same product range. Consequently there has
been a wave of emerging grocery stores specialized in, for example, organic products.
In the meantime certain grocery stores acquire larger spaces for their operation and as a
result they are able to offer an even larger product ranges.


A significant research effort has been directed towards comparing traditional purchase
behavior with e-commerce. (Degeratu, Rangaswamy, & Wu, 1998) Thus, a research
focusing on buyer behavior in the context of different product ranges is very relevant.
This paper focuses on consumer behavior in different contexts. The first context is a
small grocery store. The second one is a large supermarket. In order to establish a clear
view of certain patterns the same one consumer will be observed at both locations. After
the observations are recorded a brief interview will be conducted to thoroughly
understand identified patterns. First, the purpose of the study is presented, followed by a
brief description of available literature. The third section focuses on the methodology
used in this study. In the fourth section the data collected is analyzed and the first results
are presented. These results are then summarized together with concluding comments in
the fifth section.




Purpose
  
Consumers are regularly facing situations where they have to choose between certain
products everyday. This is the case especially in the grocery market. The availability of
products can therefore be assumed to influence consumer behavior. Consequently the
research question for this qualitative study is formulated as:


How does different product ranges affect the consumer behavior in grocery stores?


The research aims to find out and gather a deeper understanding of why people use two
or more grocery stores. This is interesting to know since each store attempts to develop
a competitive advantage. Therefore, this study will look at how the use of different
product ranges affects the consumer behavior. The core of the study will be to identify
the patterns of consumer behavior in the context of different product ranges and to look
at what type of products the consumer buys from the two, significantly different,
grocery stores.


This study will focus on identifying different patterns in consumer behavior in a context
of different product ranges. The study will focus on one consumer aged above 20 years
old and who lives alone. The person chosen for the study will frequently visit two
different grocery stores. The stores chosen for the study are of different character. One
is a small convenience store (K-Market Pietarinkatu) and the other is a large S-Market
(Kasarminkatu). The choice of stores can be related to convenience sampling presented
by Patton (2002).


The research object is chosen through criterion sampling described by Patton (2002) as
samples chosen based on a certain criterion. In this case the criterion is that both study
objects are of same gender, age and purchase food and beverages at the same two
locations mentioned above. (Patton, 2002)


The methods used will be both interviews and observations. This is because Eisenhardt
(1989) claims that it is possible and encouraged to use two or more methods
(Eisenhardt, 1989). The research will take place during week 7 in order to get a
comprehensive yet compatible result. Studying the purchase behavior of the two
consumers during the same week will allow more conclusions to be made since each
purchase influences the other. Even if no general conclusions can be made after this
study there will be certain elements that can be used for future research.


The analysis of the gathered data will be conducted in an inductive manner. This is
because there is no predetermined hypothesis for the study. Instead, all knowledge
generated by the study will be considered new. The analysis will focus on finding
certain patterns in the consumer behavior in order to understand how the product range
may affect purchasing decisions.




Theory
  
  
  

Theory about consumer behavior can be very general. It is normal that the research
focuses on general patterns that can be related to, for example, cultural factors. (Bhasin,
2010) While these general guidelines can be of tremendous help, they do not present
specific buying behavior patterns that can be related to e.g. personal experiences. This
section will present some of the central consumer behavior literature and develop a
framework for this study. Based on this framework an analysis will be conducted at the
final stages of this study to potentially create new influencing factors or other
interesting patterns.


Shah (2010) presents an interesting aspect of factors that influence consumer behavior;
personal factors. There are mainly four personal factors that can be seen to affect the
behavior of a consumer. These factors are: lifestyle, economic situation, occupation and
age. (Shah, 2010) Lifestyle is the concept of the person's surroundings, opinions,
activities and interest. In order to gain an understanding of the influence of the lifestyle
factor the methodology needs to be well formulated and adapted to a suitable context.


The economic situation of the customer basically depends on the monthly income.
These factors can be very decisive with regard to the product choices. If the consumer
has a high income or a large amount of available funds then the choice of products will
be directed to more expensive products. On the other hand, if the consumer has a low
monthly income or a small amount of available funds, then the choice of products will
be directed towards more inexpensive products. (Shah, 2010)


According to Shah (2010) the consumer's occupation can affect the consumer behavior.
The justification for this statement is that "a marketing manager of an organization will
try to purchase business suits, whereas a low level worker in the same organization will
purchase rugged working clothes." (Shah, 2010) It can be expected that the occupation
of the consumer might have an influence on the behavior of a consumer since this factor
can also be strongly related to the lifestyle and economic situation.


The last factor presented in Shah (2010) is the age of the consumer. The age of the
consumer is related to his or her stage of the lifecycle. Between these stages the
behavior can change drastically, thus impacting the behavior significantly. (Shah, 2010)
This research will focus on, what can be regarded as, the first stage of the consumer
behavior lifecycle; an unmarried, single household consumer.


The data collected in this study can be categorized according to the factors presented
above. The impact of each factor will be assessed in different contexts of different
product ranges.




Method description and justification
  

In this study methodology can relate to three different phases. Firstly, certain methods
will be used in order to justify the sampling. Secondly, methods will be used for data
collection. Thirdly, the data collected will be analyzed through methods specified in this
section. Prior to presenting and justifying each method chosen for this study a short
discussion regarding general guidelines for method usage is presented.

There are various scholars that have focused their research on research methods.
Consequently there is a great deal of available literature. Silverman (2006) discusses
methodology from a quality point of view. In order to achieve high quality research and
consequent results, scholars should strive to use various different methods (Silverman,
2006; Wallendorf & Belk, 1989). By using different methods throughout the research,
the researcher manages to increase the overall quality and eliminates the effect of errors.
The use of different methods is called triangulation and means that different approaches
are used in order to reach the final outcome of a research (Silverman, 2006; Wallendorf
& Belk, 1989).




Sampling method
  

This study will increase the overall quality through the evaluation and choice of
different methods at various stages. Next, the choice of methods will be justified with
regard to each phase of this study.

The first method that needs to be evaluated are related to sampling. The choice of the
samples included in the study will have an influence on the results presented in this
study. Therefore, the choice of sampling method is essential. Several sampling methods
seem to be appropriate in this study. However, in order to remain realistic and not to
create challenges for the study the sampling in this case will be based on convenience.
Convenience sampling is described in Eisenhardt (1989) as a sampling strategy where
the samples are chosen based on the convenience and availability to the researcher
(Eisenhardt, 1989). Since this study concerns a consumer there is no point in choosing
the sample through any other method. Simply, there would be no additional value in
choosing another strategy. By using convenience sampling resources are saved and can
be allocated to other areas of this study where they are needed.

The person chosen for this study is a 24-year old female who lives in a single
household. She is a student in Economics and a full-time worker. She was chosen to this
study based on her grocery buying behavior.

Data collection methods
  

In accordance with the term triangulation, the data will be collected for this study
through two methods (Wallendorf & Belk, 1989; Silverman, 2006). The data will be
collected first through observations and secondly through an interview. This will allow
for general data to be collected during the observation and then complemented through
a more in-depth interview.


Observations in a research require a more professional approach than the daily
observations we make. The observations in this research will have to extend beyond our
usual observations. The data collected through the observations will play a large part of
the results and therefore the impact will be great on the research. (Silverman, 2006) The
role of the researcher is also important. The distinction can be made between
perspectives-in-action and perspectives-of-action (Eisenhardt, 1989). Perspectives-in-
action means that the researcher takes an active role and actually tries to observe
everything the study object performs during the observation. Perspectives-of-action
means that the researcher takes no active role, instead he or she relies on the information
provided by the observed. (Belk & Kozinets, 2005) This study will be performed as a
perspectives-in-action study where the researcher will take an active role in observing
the behavior patterns of the person being observed. This agrees with Arnould &
Wallendorf (1994) where the perspectives-in-action is described as a strategy that
allows more complete comprehensions are possible to be made (Arnould & Wallendorf,
1994). This means that the buying behavior in this research will be observed during
both occasions by the researcher. However, there will be no interaction with the person
observed during the process.


The second data collection method used in this study is an interview. The interview will
be conducted based on an interview guide that will be prepared in accordance with the
data collected during the observations. The reason why the use of an interview is
justified is because observations cannot record emotions, values or expectations
(Arnould & Wallendorf, 1994). Therefore the aim with the interview is to gain
additional knowledge about these factors that could not be gained from the two
observation occasions.
The interview method used in this study is a semi-structured interview that has certain
predetermined elements but is also open for additional, possibly interesting themes for
the research. (Patton, 2002) The reason behind the choice of a semi-structured interview
is that it is the most appropriate fit for the purpose of the study. In this case an
unstructured interview would be too liberal possibly risking that the necessary
information will not be gathered. Since this interview only concerns one person a
standardized interview would serve no purpose since there is the possibility of making a
customized, targeted and purposeful interview. (Patton, 2002)




Methods for analysis
  

The results in this study will be derived from data analysis. This section presents the
methods that will be used for analyzing the data collected through the already discussed
methods. The methods used for analysis are presented in Spiggle (1994). Once more, in
accordance with term triangulation presented by Silverman (2006) and Wallendorf &
Belk (1989), more than one method will be used in order to increase the overall quality
of this study.

Spiggle (1994) presents the method of categorization as one of the most common and
efficient analysis methods. This method basically requires the researcher to organize
categories into which the data can be associated. This way the data can be well
distinguished and purposefully analyzed. (Spiggle, 1994) The theoretical framework in
this study serves as an excellent base for categorizing the data collected. Therefore,
categorization will be used as the fundamental method of analysis in this study.

Since this study involves observations at two different occasions a method called
comparison can be used. This method is an analytical approach to a situation where data
from two or more contexts have been gathered. Also in this method, it is required to
first categorize the data and then perform a deeper analysis. (Spiggle, 1994) This
method is suitable for this study since it aims at discovering similarities and differences
in the data collected. This aim is strongly in accordance with the purpose of this study;
to discover consumer behavior patterns in contexts of different product ranges.
The last methods for analysis will, unlike categorization and comparison, focus on
analyzing the data collected through the conducted interview. The purpose of the
interview is to gain a deeper knowledge of the patterns discovered during the
observations. (Patton, 2002) The method that will be used to analyze the results from
the interview is called dimensionalization and is described by Spiggle (1994) as relating
concepts to each other by using degrees of, for example, importance (Spiggle, 1994). In
this study the importance of each category will be assessed through dimensionalization.
This way it will be possible to relate certain patterns to the larger grocery store and
others to the smaller one. In the meantime, the differences will be promoted since the
interview will provide a justification to why a certain pattern is present in one store and
not in another.


Information about the informant
  

This short section presents the person used as an informant in this study.

[Table]


Analysis
  

This section will analyze the data collected through both the two observations and the
interview. First the data from the observations will be analyzed followed by an analysis
of the data from the interview. Finally, the analysis from both methods will be united in
order to identify patterns for the study as a whole.

Analysis of the data collected through observations
  

For the sake of simplicity the analysis and related results are presented in the following
table.

[Table]

Certain differences and similarities can be identified from the analysis presented in table
1. The most notable differences are that large packages were purchased from S-Market,
which is not only located further away but also has a hill in between. In the meantime,
heavy packages, like milk, were purchased from the store that was located closer the
observed's residence. This distinction can be related to the distance between the
residence and each store. At this point of the research a new category that can be related
to personal factors influencing consumer behavior, discussed in the theory chapter, can
be proposed. This category can be named physical constraints that seem to be relevant
in this case. However, the validity of this category has to be verified in the interview.


Other interesting observations were that the visit to the larger store seemed more
planned than the visit to the smaller one. This factor can be related to both lifestyle and
economical situation of the observed. Planning a visit to one store signals that there is
some underlying purpose behind the visit. This can be related to that one store is either
more inexpensive or that it is some sort of a factor related to the lifestyle. Certain
products that fit the lifestyle of the person observed might not be available in smaller
store. Therefore the study object is forced to visit a store with a more complete product
range in order to follow her lifestyle. Again, this assumption needs more verification
during the interview.



Analysis of the data collected through the interview
  
  
  

The purpose of the interview is to gain a deeper understanding of certain patterns that
were observed. The data will be analyzed based on the categorization presented in the
theory-chapter with an addition of the physical constraint category presented in the
previous section. The following table presents the findings from the interview.

  [Table]

The analysis of the data from the interview supports the assumptions raised in the
previous section. First, the visit to the store with a larger product range was well
planned. The visit to this specific store only occurs once a week. On the other hand, the
respondent frequently visits the smaller store. This pattern relates to all categories
presented. Due to the person's busy lifestyle she has a limited amount of time to do
groceries. Her economic situation promotes economical solutions for her grocery
purchases but that can interfere with the time constraint. As it appears, both factors are
critical for the respondent but the time constraint is more difficult to manage since the
condition depends on a number of external factors like employers.
The proposed category "physical constraints", proved to be relevant in this research.
Items of large size could be purchased from either store; the decisive factor was the
price. However, milk for example, was only purchased from the store located closer to
the respondent because of the weight.


Conclusive results
  
  

This research has generated a number of interesting results. The purpose of the study
was fulfilled since certain patterns were discovered that clearly could be related to the
size of the product range. A store with a large product range can offer products in
different packages according to size. This study shows that even single people purchase
large package in order to save money and time. A possible assumption from this study
is that the larger packages can rarely be located in smaller stores. Therefore, consumers
possibly have to find these economical items in stores that might be located further
away from their home.


Another notable pattern was that certain values could be pushed aside when factors like
time constraints and limited budgets appear. A person might save time through spending
more money on a certain item. This study shows that planning of buying behavior can
have a large impact on the overall consumer behavior.

Quality recognition
  

Quality has been promoted throughout this study through the use of triangulation. By
using triangulation, small errors and misinterpretations can be avoided. This can be
witnessed in the diverse selection of methods for this study. The usage of several
methods opens up for greater interpretation possibilities. (Wallendorf & Belk, 1989;
Silverman, 2006)

