The Eco-Friendliness of Luxury Brands: the viewpoint of consumers

1 Introduction
Recently, there has been a wide interest in luxury brands. The luxury industry is considered relatively small in terms of companies operating on the market, but generates a vast sum of money (Okonkwo 2007: foreword). The value of the luxury market was estimated in 2005 and reached a tremendous $840 billion (Truong, Simmons, McColl & Kitchen 2008:189). Luxury branding has received considerable attention, since the classical rules of marketing that applies to non-luxury brands need to be turned upside down in order to work for luxury brands (Kapferer & Bastien 2009). This implies resisting clients’ demands, making it difficult for clients to buy and raising your prices continuously in order to increase demand (ibid.). Luxury brands are considered the most influential brands, since they set the trends that non-luxury brands follow and imitate (Okonkwo 2007: foreword). Moreover, luxury brands have the capacity to shape consumers’ preferences. 

Luxury brands are believed to be of high quality, exclusive, unique and timeless (Kapferer & Bastien 2009; Okonkwo 2007). A heritage of craftsmanship and country of origin are other defining characteristics of a luxury brand (Jackson & Shaw 2009; Okonkwo 2007). Luxury consumers are believed to be smart and intelligent, powerful, individualistic and highly demanding. In addition, a luxury consumer has high expectations as well as strong values and principles. Luxury consumers are more likely to be associated with those luxury companies that share their moral value. (Okonkwo 2007:243)

Although luxury brands have been extensively studied, less attention has been given to the green side of luxury brands. According to Orange (2010:29), the interest in “being green” and purchasing eco-friendly products continues to grow among consumers.  The characteristics that distinguish luxury brands from mass-market brands could label luxury brands as being more eco-friendly than non-luxury brands. Luxury companies are getting increasingly involved in environmental issues as well as ethical concerns. The Gucci Group has said that it will sponsor a new Ph.D. scholarship devoted to innovations in sustainable fashion and textiles in cooperation with two London universities, which is just one example of what luxury brands are doing for the environment (Socha 2009:3). Despite the efforts of luxury brands to “save the planet”, a recent report by WWF in the UK proves that none of the top luxury brands score highly on being environmentally friendly. It is of interest to further investigate whether luxury brands are eco-friendly or not. The opinions of consumers could give insight into this topic, since the consumer society is placing more and more value on ethical and moral issues including environmental protecting concerns (Okonkwo 2007:243).

1.2 The aim of the paper
The purpose of this paper is to investigate whether consumers perceive luxury brands as environmentally friendly or not. This will be done by seeking answers to the following research questions: 

1. Can the consumption of luxury goods be considered a “green act”?
2. Do consumers think that luxury brands are more environmentally friendly than non-luxury brands? If so, in which ways?
The research questions will be answered by interviewing consumers on their opinions about the eco-friendliness of luxury brands.

1.3 The structure of the paper
The remainder of the paper is divided into four chapters. Chapter 2 discusses relevant literature on the subject. Chapter 3 defines the methodology used for the paper. Chapter 4 presents the results and chapter 5 discusses the results with reference to theory. 

2 Luxury and green marketing
In this chapter the term “luxury” is explained. The green movement and how it is affecting companies and brands is also discussed. The chapter gives an outline of the consumers of luxury products, as well as green products. A figure concludes the characteristics of the two types of consumers.  

2.1 What is luxury?
Phau & Prendergast (2000:123) claim that it is difficult to define luxury since it is so subjective and personal. What one person regards as luxury does not have to be luxurious to another: one may find champagne and caviar luxurious, while another thinks that sleeping in is the height of luxury. Okonkwo (2007:11) lists some components that characterize a luxury brand. These include brand strength, differentiation, exclusivity, innovation, craftsmanship and precision, premium pricing as well as high quality. Creativity, a distinct brand identity, a global reputation and high visibility are also included in the definition of a luxury brand (Okonkwo 2007:105). Jackson & Shaw (2009:122–123,270) add country of origin and product integrity to the defining characteristics. Furthermore, Fionda & Moore (2009:359) include marketing communication, design signature, culture and environment along with service.  

The higher prices of luxury goods depend on the higher quality of the products, fancy packaging, exclusive store locations, higher retail margins, expensive promotions, advertising campaigns as well as brand names. (Husic & Cicic 2009:235)

2.2 Green marketing
The “green movement” is increasingly gaining supporters, and the eco-friendly initiatives of companies are becoming more and more important to consumers. The green movement has transformed in the last decades. In the 70’s it was primarily considered an activist movement but has now become a notable part of many nations’ economies. (Washington & Miller 2010:82) 

Adopting an environmentally friendly way of thinking can include recycling, conserving energy, reducing product consumption and buying eco-friendly products among other things. Abelitotis, Koniari & Sardianou (2010:153-154) refer to the “3R-concept”, which involves reducing, reusing and recycling. Reducing means “any effort at consumption points to reduce the amount of waste generated directly or indirectly”. Reusing is described as “the use of material things repeatedly, which extends their lifespan”. Recycling indicates “the conversion of post consumption waste to either material resources or energy”. It is emphasized that the primary focus should always be placed firstly on reducing, then reusing and then recycling (ibid.). 

Grant (2010:25) defines a green brand as “one that offers a significant eco-advantage over the incumbents and which hence appeals to those who are willing to making green a high priority”. According to Hartmann, Ibáñes & Sainz, (2005:10), a green brand identity is defined by “a specific set of brand attributes and benefits related to the reduced environmental impact of the brand and its perception as being environmentally sound”.  Hartmann et al. (2005:10) adds that a well-implemented green brand identity should provide benefits to the consumers that are environmentally conscious. 

Promoting the green initiatives of companies is not just to inform consumers about green products and services, but also about their operations. This includes the hiring practices, the production, energy usage and more. (Washington & Miller 2010:83) Some companies do not promote their green initiatives in the fear of repelling skeptical consumers. Paradoxically, this equals missed opportunities in attracting green consumers (Washington & Miller 2010:84).  The findings of a study conducted by Hartmann et al. (2005) show that a well-implemented green positioning strategy may create a more favorable perception of a brand, which give support to the green marketing approach in general. 

Banyte, Brazioniene & Gadeikiene (2010:374) are of the opinion that green marketing may become an “effective tool for acquiring company competitive advantage and for strengthening the image”. According to Chamorro & Bañegil (2006:12), green marketing should not just be limited to communication policies: ecological aspects must be incorporated into all the functional areas of marketing. They add that green marketing is not just procedures and activities of designing and commercializing green products, but” it is a philosophy that guides the behavior of the entire organization” (ibid.). 

2.3 The eco-friendliness of luxury brands 
Over the past few years, many of the world's best-known luxury labels have started to introduce eco-friendly products and include environmental themes in their advertising and marketing. French luxury conglomerate LVMH administered a “carbon inventory” to assess its impact on greenhouse gas emissions, which led to a reduction of corporate travel and air shipment of goods. It has also taken a stake to Edun, an organic clothing company founded by the singer Bono and his wife. Louis Vuitton also launched a "Core Values" advertising campaign that has featured many celebrities. The celebrities have donated part of their modeling rewards for the Climate Project: a nonprofit group founded by Al Gore and supported by Louis Vuitton. (Dodes & Schechner 2009:8)

At LVMH’s rival PPR, a social and environmental responsibility department has been created. A part of the executives’ bonuses provides capital for reaching targets in seven different areas - from reducing carbon emissions to promoting diversity. The conglomerate has also sponsored a feature-length documentary film that concerns environmental abuse. (Dodes & Schechner 2009:8)

Despite the efforts of the luxury conglomerates, they score low on being eco-friendly in the WWF report “Deeper Luxury” from 2007. LVMH is among the top scoring companies and received no more than C+. PPR received a D for their efforts. Bendell & Kleanthous (2003:2-3) justify the importance for luxury brands to be eco-friendly: 

Luxury brands have the power to influence consumer aspiration and behavior by editing consumer choices through product design, distribution and marketing and by influencing how, when and for how long consumers use their products. They have both the opportunity and the responsibility to promote sustainable consumption. 

Dodes & Schechner (2009:8) cite Anthony Kleanthous, senior policy adviser for the WWF and co-author of the report on the reactions regarding the report. According to Kleanthous, “the companies were quite defensive initially, but they are now pushing environmental and social responsibility as a positive driver of brand value”. 

According to Okonkwo (2007:64), luxury goods traditionally last a lifetime and are rarely disposed of. In an article by Ilett (2010) it is proposed that many of the elements that define luxury can support a more sustainable approach to consumption. The tailoring and craftsmanship that characterize luxury brands equal an appraisal of the valuable materials and the skillfulness in both design and creation, which kindles the desire to use luxury products time after time. Luxury needs to be perceived as more than just high-priced and premium. Luxury brands can be considered role models for a more sustainable consumption by emphasizing the features and values that give luxury products a longer lifetime than the non-luxury alternatives. (ibid) 

By aiming to reduce the amount of waste, legislators across the world are beginning to implement laws on packaging (Hildebrandt 2009:18). This has been one of the main worries in the luxury industry since the packaging adds to the brand experience and consumers have come to expect a little extra when buying luxury goods (ibid.). Hildebrandt (2009:20-22) substantiates that “sustainability is becoming just another variable for designers to work with” and that there are many alternatives to making packaging eco-friendlier: make it refillable, keep it light, use recycled materials or materials that can be recycled and make it biodegradable. 

2.4 Luxury consumers versus green consumers 
Abeliotis et al. (2010:153) discuss the paradox of consumption in their article. They conclude that consumption burdens the environment in two different ways: first by depleting non-renewable natural resources, and secondly by polluting the environment. Nevertheless, consumption is vital for economic growth. (ibid) Next, two types of consumers are discussed. 

2.4.1 Luxury consumers
According to Okonkwo (2007:60) there are two types of luxury consumers: the traditional luxury consumers, who seek well-established brands, and the new luxury consumers, who are no longer attracted by brand names only, but who cherish a complete package of products and services. They pursue the experience connected to luxury products (ibid.). 

The luxury consumer is constantly changing, but there are a few characteristics that define them. They are smart and intelligent, powerful, sophisticated and brand literate, individualistic, highly demanding, have high expectations and strong values and principles. Four out of five luxury consumers are women. The reason for why women have become the major consumers of luxury goods is that they possess more money due to increased education and career orientation. Women of today marry later and have fewer children, which has led to an increase in their disposable income. They are also influential in the luxury purchase decisions of men. (Okonkwo 2007:65-69) 

When talking about the future of luxury brands and luxury consumers, Okonkwo (2007:243) asserts that environmental awareness will drive consumers to seek information on the materials used for their products and to support companies with visible ethical practices. The temporary ownership culture will become increasingly important and second-hand luxury goods will become more fashionable and more frequently purchased. Luxury consumers do not want to dispose of products that cost up to 600 % more than similar products in other categories – reselling or exchanging them is the alternative. (Okonkwo 2007:76,244)

In a study administered by Han, Nunes & Drèze in 2010, the findings show that those with a higher income are the consumers of luxury goods. Those with a lower income, but who still seek status tend to buy counterfeits. Premium pricing, one of the characteristics of luxury brands, would equal a higher income amongst the consumers who buy luxury goods, but income does not necessarily have to be a defining variable for the consumers of luxury goods. It is possible to buy fairly new luxury bags e.g., at second hand stores and flee markets. A counterfeit product is not the only alternative to luxury goods when the income is lower. 

Husic & Cisic (2009:231) refer to luxury goods as status goods. Their results show that patron status is on of the factors that influence luxury consumption. Individuals can communicate meaning about themselves to their reference groups by using status goods as symbols and many luxury consumers buy luxury goods primarily to satisfy their appetite for symbols (Husic & Cicic 2009:234).

2.4.2 Green consumers
Green consumers are active in promoting the benefits of environmental conservation and they tend to ignore the producers of goods which are not eco-friendly (Banyte et al. 2010:375). Consumers have started to perceive care for the environment as care for themselves (ibid.). 

The results of a study conducted by Banyte et al. in 2010 reveal that more educated consumers are more sensitive to environmental issues. Moreover, the female consumers who want to contribute to environmental conservation and who are sensitive to ecological problems tend to pay more for eco-friendly products (Banyte et al. 2010:382). According to Banyte et al. (210:376), well-educated women, who belong to the age group of 30 to 44, and whose annual household income is higher than average may be considered consumers who will possibly be involved in eco-friendly product purchase behavior. 

The results from a survey by Unity Marketing show that the typical green consumer is no longer the “fashion-challenged, granola-crunching wearer of Birkenstocks” (Stevens 2008). The green consumer of today is increasingly likely to be an “affluent professional woman wearing an eco-friendly and animal-free Stella McCartney suit and satin shoes” (ibid.). The results from the survey agree with those of Banyte et al. in that women are much more concerned about environmental issues than men. This is important as women are often the ones who shop for the family and make the decisions about which products and services the family will purchase.  (ibid)

Finisterra do Paço & Raposo (2010:434-435) found three segments of consumers, based on their preferences for eco-friendliness. The uncommitted have knowledge about environmental issues, but do not engage in any environmentally friendly behavior. The green activists are individuals in the ages between 25 and 34 and between 45 and 54. The individuals with the highest education levels, working in more qualified jobs and earning higher incomes can be found in this segment. They feel strongly about all environmental aspects, particularly towards perceived efficiency, environmentally friendly buying behavior, recycling, sensitivity to the economic factor and resource saving. The undefined have a positive attitude towards recycling but are highly skeptical about the promotional and advertising claims made by firms. This group thinks that their individual actions cannot contribute to saving the environment and environmental issues do not concern them much. (ibid)

Chen (2009:12) declares that once status becomes a concern people become more likely to go green. Wealth and self-sacrifice boost social status, and going green proclaims that the buyer not only has the wealth to buy a (sometimes) pricier product, but is also willing to sacrifice personal comfort for the greater good. (ibid)

Figure 1 summarizes the different characteristics of luxury consumers and green consumers. The figure shows that luxury and green consumers are very much alike.
[Table]

3 Methodology
This chapter discusses the methodology used in the paper. The method, the sample and the collection of data are explained. 

3.1 Method
The aim of this study is to investigate whether consumers perceive luxury brands as environmentally friendly or not. The aim will be achieved by explorative research and qualitative methods. Saunders, Lewis & Thornhill (2003:96) cite Robson (2002:59) and describe explorative research ”as a valuable means of finding out what is happening; to seek new insights; to ask questions and to assess phenomena in a new light”. Qualitative data is based on meanings expressed through words. The collection of qualitative data results in non-standardized data that requires classification into categories. (Saunders et al. 2003:378)

It is common to use interviews when performing explorative research (Saunders et al. 2003:250). Saunders et al. (2003:246) distinguish between three types of interviews: structured, semi-structured and unstructured. Semi-structured interviews will be used in this paper. In semi-structured interviews, the researcher has a list of themes and questions to be covered, but these can vary between interviews. The order of the questions may vary, some may be omitted and additional questions may be needed depending on the flow of the discussion. (Saunders et al. 2003:246-247)

The chosen method is justified because of the nature of the research questions. Deeper responses (compared with simple yes/no-answers) are needed to reach the aim of the paper and understand how consumers feel about the eco-friendliness of luxury brands. 

3.2 Sample
The respondents were chosen through non-probability sampling, which implies that ”the probability of each case being selected from the total population is not known” (Saunders et al 2003:152), and more specifically through convenience sampling, which involves selecting those cases that are easiest to obtain for the sample (Saunders et al. 2003:177). Because women are the primary consumers of luxury and eco-friendly products, the respondents consist of women between the ages of 20-32. The women are the same interviewed for my bachelor’s thesis. 

3.3 Collection of data
The interviews were based on an interview guide (see Appendix 1). The questions were developed from the research questions in the introduction and can be considered more general and open than the specific research questions. 

This section will further explain how the data was collected. 

4 Results
This chapter will include the results from the interviews.

5 Discussion
This chapter will discuss the results related to the theory presented in chapter 2. Managerial implications and tips for further research will also be presented. 

5.1 Discussion of results

5.2 Managerial implications
This section presents what the results implicate for managers. 

5.3 Further research
The ethics of luxury brands could be an interesting field of research. Buyers of luxury goods do not by counterfeits that fund terrorism. Country-of-origin; Italy or France, probably means that no child labor is involved.