INTRODUCTION
In today’s competitive environment, marketing and advertising are vital strategic activities for every company. Especially food marketers face a huge competition in markets and therefore, advertising is particularly crucial for them. The motivator for this intense food market is realistic; food is a necessity for all consumers and thus captures a main portion of consumers’ lifelong spending; food is a repeat-purchase item and consumers may switch their purchasing habits quickly and; food products are one of the most branded items which require significant advertising (Story et al. 2004:2).
In the past forty years marketers have realized that there is a huge market among children. Nearly two billion dollars was spent on advertising for children only in the United States in 2007 (Smith, 2010). Advertisers target children not only because of their own spending power but also because of their influence on their parents’ purchasing behavior and because of their future as potential adult consumers (Story et al.  2004). Although marketers see children as an important target group, the question of ethicalness arises particularly when children are involved. But is it really needed to advertise for children? If so, is it ethical to advertise to them and should there be some restrictions for it? 
Not only are there ethical issues with advertising for children but also in addition, there are real health related concerns with children’s food advertising. There have been discussions about the relationship of food advertising and childhood obesity that is increasing, especially in the United States.  Many scholars think that even if there are many contributing factors to overweight children, the activities of food marketers present one of the major reasons for children’s obesity (Grimm, 2004).  In addition, studies show that almost 95% of advertised foods for children are high-fat, high-sugar, or high-salt products (Grimm, 2004; Story, 2004).
This paper attempts to present the nature of advertising and some areas of concerns that are involved especially when marketing for children. The later section provides some information on already existing regulations with the marketing activities towards children and some possible shortages within it. In the end of the paper ethical questions concerning children’s advertising in food-related products will be discussed as well as the problem of children’s obesity.  Finally, the paper will try to present some future suggestions for the area of children’s marketing. 

NATURE OF ADVERTISING

The preliminary purpose of advertising is to create brand awareness and recognition, despite the target group in question. However especially for the target group of children, this aim is even further important. Children have a huge potential for future market and, therefore, marketers think that it is vital to build this brand awareness early in their life (Moore, 2004). A clear example of this importance of the children’s market is that focus groups in marketing purposes are arranged for as young children as five years old! (CITATION needed. Need to find the article, coming up in the second draft!)
The most advertised products for children are food and beverages as well as toys. Some critics have been raised due to the commercialization of social and religious events like Christmas, for example (Gunter et al., 2005). Pine and Nash (2002, cited in Preston, 2005) discovered that during Christmas time, children who viewed television and saw toy advertisements regularly, requested more presents overall and also specific toys by brand name - compared to children who were not exposed to toy advertisements. This illustrates how advertisements have the commercial effect on children. 
The main channel to reach children is television. According to Gunter et al., there are some reasons why television is the best way to reach children. First, nearly all families have a TV at their house. Additionally, today it is quite normal that children have a TV in their own room and thus, it is relatively easy to advertise for children via television. Kunkel (2001, cited in Gunter et al., 2005) proposed that contemporary children may view as many as 40,000 commercials each year in the United States which explains how TV is the biggest marketing channel for children. EUROPE STATS COMING! Second, there is limited control and regulations with television advertising for children, which will be discussed in depth later in the paper. Furthermore, children do not only watch TV on their own but also with their parents at prime time which exposes children to many additional advertisements. (Gunter et al., 2005). 
THE DISCUSSION OF THE AGE
There has been, and still is, an extensive discussion of what is the right age to market towards children. When are children old enough to understand the advertisements? And what is the age that children are not thought to be too vulnerable for advertisements? The common thought is that children are old enough to be marketed when they can distinguish the difference between TV programs and commercials. Children must be able to separate when an advertisement starts and when it ends. In addition, children must understand the intent of advertising; the realization that advertising is done to create purchasing behavior (Gunter et al., 2005). 
Many theories have been used to interpret the correct and more specifically the ethical age of children to be advertised for. One theory that is usually referred to is Jean Piaget’s theory of four cognitive stages in children’s development. Piaget’s theory focuses on children’s problem solving at different cognitive levels. Therefore in this theory, children’s understanding of advertisements should be considered as problem solving. In reality however, implying Piaget’s theory is not as straightforward as it is in theory. The main message that is taken from his theory is that children have limited cognitive abilities and thus, they possess limited understanding of advertisements at different stages. For example according to Piaget, children at preoperational stage (2-7 years old) have a huge ‘egocentrism’ phase which indicates that they cannot understand ideas or thoughts from anyone else’s point of view. Therefore, “it is likely that they will have difficulty understanding the persuasive nature of advertising” (Gunter et al., 2005:65).  
Overall, it is thought that children around eight years old would understand the intent of advertising and the differences between reality and advertisement as well as the differences between TV shows and advertisements. Many scholars think that at the age of eight children will be developed enough to be exposed to advertising; “children below seven or eight are not so equipped to deal with advertising” (Preston, 2004:366). Hence, an ethical age for children who are advertised for would be at least eight years old.

AREAS OF CONCERN
Gunter et al. (2005) identifies six different areas of concern in marketing and advertising for young children. Due to children’s vulnerability and lack of reliable judgment skills, these concerns may mislead children in an advertisement. These areas of concern “include exaggeration, fantasy, particular appeals, celebrities, use of metaphors, and special effects” (Gunter et al., 2005). Exaggeration refers to phrases such as “better than” and “the best” which may be very misleading and deceptive for children. The idea behind fantasy is that advertisements are creating a fantasy environment and a sort of magical picture so that it may be misleading to a child who does not distinguish the difference between reality and an advertisement. Appeals refer to certain “pitches” that are used in advertising for children. These themes that advertisers are trying to create in advertising targeted to children are “fun/happiness, taste/flavor/smell, and product performance” (Gunter et al.,2005:21). These “pitches” may create a deceiving picture for children about the true nature of the product. Celebrities is an area where popular people and cartoon characteristics are used in advertising. Using of celebrities may create confusion to children: “the use of celebrities and cartoons diminishes younger children’s ability to distinguish advertising from programmed material” (Preston, 2005:63). Metaphors are ways of using the language in a way that it attracts the children. Their purpose is to create some visual image that children can associate with. The last area of concern is special effects. It is a concern because the special effect techniques used in advertising may mislead children to expect similar effects if using the product in question (Gunter et al., 2005). 
In addition to these above areas of concern, there are incidental effects that may follow from advertising for children. These incidental effects are related to children’s health and social concerns such as “advertising on nutrition, smoking, under-age drinking, social stereotyping, and self-image” (Gunter et al., 2005:120). These effects will not be further discussed but it is important to realize that advertising may be a partial reason why children face with issues mentioned above. 

REGULATIONS
The APA, American Psychology Association, think that under eight years old children are too vulnerable for advertising and thus, it should be legally restricted (Preston, 2004). However, these regulations for children’s advertising vary a lot between countries. There are different regulations around the world and for example… EXAMPLES OF EUROPEAN COUNTRIES. These regulations vary a lot between the countries due to diverse value systems in each country as well as the differences in media & advertising structures. Generally, there are two areas of regulations that are common in Europe; 1) scheduling of the advertisements and 2) the content of the advertisement. EXAMPLES! (Gunter et al., 2005). 
This section will talk about food advertising and especially about the products that are high in fat and sugar etc. I want to present the question of is it wrong from marketers to advertise these products or is it actually the producers of the products that are to blame. Is it ethical even to produce products that have poor nutritional values for children who are growing and developing. (Articles: Preston, 2004; Vashishtha, 2010; Metha et al., 2010; O’Sullivan, 2005).
*online advertising	

CHILHOOD OBESITY
I would like to include this chapter on the paper since it is an increasing problem. Not quite sure where to include it. 
(Articles: Metha et al., 2010; O’Sullivan, 2005. Gunter et al. and another material?)

ETHICAL VS. UNETHICAL
A discussion of whether children’s advertising is ethical or unethical. More sources needed – one book; Ethical marketing.

RECOMMENDATIONS ???
CONCLUSION
