Is it possible for a company to measure the strength of their own brand? Testing of Rank of Mind in practice


1 Introduction
In the last 20 years there have been many papers describing branding, brand loyalty and how
companies with strong brands may have a competitive advantage against companies with weaker
brands (Mårtenson 2009, Håkansson 2004). According to Håkansson (2004), there is much
evidence to support the idea that companies with strong brands find it easier to create lasting and
tight customer relationships, which also can be concretely seen in the revenues. Because revenue
and success are relevant for a company to survive, there is a huge interest to research in brands,
and see which aspects that may affect the brand and the strength of it. When a company knows
how strong the own brand is, and how the customers evaluate the brand, is it much easier to do
decisions according to the development of the brand.


Observation by Håkansson (2004) shows that interest for brands and branding grew up in the end
of the 80s, when people realized that companies were sold for prices that could correspond to 25
years profit of the companies. Where the money is, lays also peoples interest. This is why there
has been so much research around brands and branding, and this is also why I am going to focus
this research paper on branding, brand strength and brand loyalty of customers.


But as in all research fields, the information is not complete. Many researchers, for example
Håkansson (2004) and Mårtenson (2009) have come up with models and theories to measure
the strength of a brand, but nobody has tested these theories in practice to see if they really
work with real existing companies. Although all the previous experiments have been done on
a theoretical level, there is a gap in how the theories work in practice. Because few researchers
have studied this area, I see a possibility to create a new research platform, which in the future
may help companies to focus on the right and relevant aspects in branding and brand creation.


The questions remain: Do theoretical frameworks that have been made up for measuring brand
strength work in practice? And could it be possible for companies in the future to use these
models to build strong brands?


This study will focus on answering these questions, and the model I have chosen to test, is
Håkanssons (2004) Rank of Mind that during the last ten years has become quite famous in
marketing divisions. In this paper I hope to show that brand awareness of the company is
important, and that there should be a model for the companies to test their brand strength so that
strong brands would be developed in the future.


This paper is divided in five chapters and is structured as follows: I start by presenting a
literature review, where I bring up conclusions by earlier researchers. This means that I in
the chapter will identify what a brand and branding concretely means, and after that present
Håkanssons (2004) Rank of Mind model, which I am going to use in my study. With this chapter
I hope to give the reader an overview of branding as a subject, so that it is easier for the reader
to understand why this research is so important, and how this research could improve companies
branding strategies in the future. In the third chapter I will present which companies I have
chosen to test the Rank of Mind model on, and then how I have decided to do the study. Because
this is a study made on opinions and feelings by the customers, I see it based on (Hirsjärvi &
Hurme 2001) relevant to do a qualitative study to get as reliable conclusion on the questions.
In chapter four I will present and analyze the material I have collected in the study, where after
I in chapter five will present my conclusions and give practical advices and suggestions to
companies, based on my study.




2 Theory
To make this research relevant, I will introduce this paper with this theory chapter. After reading
this chapter the reader should have a clear picture about what a brand is, why it is important to
a company, how it the strength of it can be measured, and how the Rank of Mind model can be
used to measure the brand.


The chapter i divided as following: First I will define what a brand is, why it is important and
how a company can use it as an competitive advantage against its competitors. After that I will
present some background information to why branding have been so interesting as a research
area during the last 20 years, and finally i will present the Rank of Mind modell by Håkansson
(2004) to show the reader in practise how a brand can be measured.


2.1 A brand - What is it?
According to AMA (American Marketing Association) a brand is:


"Name, term, design, symbol, or any other feature that identifies one seller's good or service as
                                 distinct from those of other sellers"


But Håkansson (2004) indicates that a brand is also something that you cannot recognize with
a bare eye. It is an intangible resource, which role and usage for the company has increased
radically during the last 100 years. But the interesting thing is that researchers has started to
pay attention to the importance and value of brand during the last 20 years. This is according to
Keller (2003) because of the huge number of new products and services that forms the market
today. If a company wants to sell more products than it's competitors it has to differentiate itself
from other market players, and prove the to the customer that the offered products or services somehow
different and better than other companies offerings( King & Grace 2007).




2.2 How do you build up a brand?
Because the relevance of brands, branding and brand measuring has become so important to
the market players, it has also been a very interesting research area for researchers. One key-
question that has been discussed and criticized by many, is the question about who is the person
or institution who forms the brand and the content of it. Is it the company who decides what the
brand stands for, or is it the customers?


Håkansson (2004), whose theory I also want to base this research on, indicates that the customer is
the part who make the final decision of what the brand is standing for, and how they evaluate and see
it compared to other brands. This also what Mårtensen (2009) thinks, but she also indicates that the
company has the possibility to impact on how the customer do the final evaluation. But how is this done?
Mårtensen (2009), Håkansson (2004) and many other researchers thinks this is done by effective and
relevant marketing methods, that makes the product or service relevant for the customer. Håkansson
(2004) points out that it is also the customer who has to be used to make the measurement of the strength
of the brand, which mean that everything that has to do with branding starts and ends with the customer
(Håkansson 2004). If the company does not succeed in building up a relevant picture of the brand in the
head of the customer by a relevant marketing strategy, the company will never succeed in getting a high
brand ranking from the customers.


Keller (2003) and King and Grace (2007) indicates that one important thing that a company should
remember in the branding process, is that customers for the most want to associate themself with brands
they like. One good example is BMW, which for many users is symbolizing something more than just a
car. It is an driving experience, that the consumer feel that he/she cannot get by driving another car.




Rank of Mind - A model to measure a brand
Rank of Mind model was founded by Håkansson (2004), when he wrote the book `'Det
missförstådda varumärket''. The key-factors with the model focuses on question that the
company has to ask it's customers. The restriction with the model is that companies does not
always have access to the information that the model requires, because the pictures and feelings
that customers form about a brand in their heads, may sometimes be so deep in their minds,
that he cannot explain even to himself. How can a company then understand something, that
customers cannot explain for himself? This is why the model is not used so much in practise.
The Rank of Mind model measures the brand based on attitudes and preferences, which
Håkansson (2004) indicates are the main factor that a brand is built up on the heads of the
customers. The Rank of Mind model gives a clear picture to the researcher of how a brand is
penetrated in the segment group who uses the brand. The questions asked from the customer
concerns the following areas:


    Question of Total Knowledge - Which mean the number/percent of people in the segment
       group who know about the existence of the brand.
     Question of Spontaneous Knowledge - Which mean the number/percent of the segment
       group who mention your brand spontaneously, when you mention the branch you are
       active within.
    Question Top of Mind - Which mean the number of people/percent of segment group who
       mention your brand first of all the brands in the same branch
     Question of Attitude - Shows the number of how many of the segment group have a
       positive association to your brand.
     Question of Short-list - Shows how many of the segment group actively think about
       choosing your brand
     Question of Preferences - Shows how many of the segment group who would choose
       your brand as the first alternative from all the other brands in the branch.
    Question of Loyalty - How many of the segment group buy products from your related to
       your brand.


                                            [Figure]




It is important for the company to remember that the Rank of Mind model does not give any
information about the content of the brand, it just gives an overview of how strong the brand is,
which mean that the company after doing this research should continue researching in what the
customer specifically see as positive and negative aspects in the brand. (Håkansson 2004)
3 Methods

4 Results

5 Discussion

