From Traditional Mobile Marketing to Offering Mobile Services – a Special Emphasis on Intelligent SMS

1. Introduction
SMS (short message service) is the most popular application of mobile phone services showing a very high usage with an estimated 5 billion text messages sent in 2010 globally (Dickinger, Haghirian, Murphy and Scharl 2004, MMA 2010, Murphy and Scharl 2004). Text messaging and MMS (multimedia messaging) marketing are growing rapidly. The continuous technical innovations, high penetration of mobile phones and the potential of this marketing channel engage its popularity (Gopal and Tripathi 2006).
Mobile marketing has become one of the most topical phenomena in the field of marketing.  This relatively new channel which utilizes mobile phones when communicating company’s messages to target audiences has the potential to change the entire marketing process (Haig 2002). Already in the early days of mobile commerce, Kumar and Zahn (2002) predicted that mobile phones would become the medium for improved business operations and enhanced customer satisfaction. This channel is said to have good possibilities of becoming the best-targeted advertising channel presenting new means of communication compared with the traditional channels such as television or mail (Leppäniemi and Karjaluoto 2005). 

1.1. Research Question
A considerable amount of literature has been published about mobile marketing and the common viewpoint seems to be supportive. Several scholars tout the promises of this ubiquitous phenomenon. Barnes and Scornavacca (2004) even predict that in the near future, mobile marketing will become as common a marketing medium as the television or the newspaper. This has nevertheless not happened quite as predicted; despite the high penetration of mobile devices and the huge potential of this channel, mobile marketing cannot be said to blossom, at least not today.

Due to the past and ongoing research, plenty of information has already been gathered on this marketing channel. Many scholars highlight the mushrooming of the phenomenon, (Barwise and Strong 2002, Gopal and Tripathi 2006, Leppäniemi and Karjaluoto 2005), whereas some focus on the issues of permission and acceptance (Barnes and Scornavacca, 2004, Heinonen and Strandvik, 2007). Furthermore, there are some theories and conceptual models on how mobile marketing campaigns should be implemented (Dickinger, Haghirian, Murphy and Scharl 2004, Leppäniemi and Karjaluoto 2005).

A great proportion of studies adopts a company perspective and concentrates on the several marketer benefits of mobile marketing. However, there is less research adopting a consumer perspective investigating the opinions of consumers towards this marketing medium. Therefore, mobile marketing could be argued to be on a theoretical, rather than on a practical level. (Constantiou, Damsgaard and Knutsen 2006) It is however becoming increasingly significant to take the consumer viewpoint when studying this marketing activity, consumers after all have the final word on whether this marketing channel will succeed in the long run.

This paper starts from the premise that a certain transition is occurring from the more traditional mobile marketing to a more recent and fresh approach of offering mobile services. The emerging transition is believed to be in consequence of the changing role of today’s consumers, who have more information, greater access to the existing possibilities and a bigger role in value creation (Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2004). This indicates that as a result, consumers also have growing expectations from companies, which further requires these companies to fulfil, or even surpass these expectations by offering ever more innovative solutions.      

With services, this paper refers to “pure” services on the basis of consumer’s needs, not merely services, such as ordering and paying for products from vending machines via mobile phones. Whereas mobile marketing, as already mentioned, has been a widely researched field, offering services through mobile phones on the other hand, is a rather un-researched field as it is a relatively new phenomenon. Thus, in the absence of previous academic studies, it offers a niche for further investigation.

The special emphasis of this paper lies in intelligent SMS (hereafter referred to as iSMS) solution created by BookIT Oy, a software and services company specialized in mobile business services and applications technologies. The iSMS is an interactive version of the standard SMS which enhances two-way dialogues between the sender, e.g. organization or telecom service provider and the end-user, e.g. consumer. (BookIT) The iSMS is chosen as the target of investigation since as a new and innovative application applying a more service-oriented view to SMS marketing, it is believed to represent the more recent approach of offering mobile services and embody the advantages of this marketing activity.  

1.2. Aim of the paper
This paper discusses a somewhat new phenomenon of offering services through mobile phones. 
The purpose of this paper is to consider the end-users’ perceptions towards mobile services, in the form of text messages delivered to their mobile phones. The paper further adopts a pure and comprehensive consumer standpoint and therefore contributes to the knowledge of the end-user perceptions of the phenomenon, which this paper argues to be the most significant factor in the success of mobile marketing.

1.3. Structure of the paper	
The theoretical discussion of this paper is divided into two main parts; the transition of the approaches and the main characteristics of iSMS. The first main part, Chapter 2 consists of a brief overview of the traditional mobile marketing which is followed by a discussion about the more recent and fresh approach of offering mobile services.   
The second main part, Chapter 3 tackles the main characteristics of iSMS, which this paper suggests to be interactivity, privacy & relevance, convenience and value perspective.
Before moving on to the theoretical discussion of the paper, the Figure 1 is presented to capture and remind about the most significant motivations and goals for this paper. 

[Figure]

2. The transition of the approaches 
As already mentioned, the transition is believed to have taken place due to the ever growing expectations of today’s consumers and the resulting pressure for change from the company perspective. Furthermore, the transition from the traditional mobile marketing to offering mobile services could be said to follow the paradigm shift taken place in the field of marketing, which emphasises services over product-orientation (Grönroos 2007, Vargo and Lusch 2004). The following chapters discuss first the traditional view and then cover the more recent approach of offering mobile services. The chapter ends with a more detailed description of intelligent SMS services.      

2.1. Traditional mobile marketing
Traditional mobile marketing can be argued to be marketer-oriented in a sense that it is promotional in nature (Balasubramanian, Peterson and Järvenpää 2002, Dickinger and Haghirian 2004) and offers consumers monetary benefits in the form of e.g. coupons or campaigns (The Finnish Direct Marketing Association 2009), such as coupons entitling to a free t-shirt or a campaign offering concessionary fares on new mobile phone models. The traditional mobile marketing can be claimed to marketer-oriented also in a sense that the messages are general as well as offering-oriented. General, since the messages are not directed to a specific consumer, but instead are typically addressed to a wider audience. Offering-oriented, since the messages typically promote a certain good or a service encouraging the consumers to try a particular offering.  These general and offering-oriented messages however might not be relevant enough to the consumer’s situation and may fail to meet the consumer requirements of value adding information and high relevance. For these reasons, the common reaction to mobile marketing is believed to remain one of ‘aggravating’. 

2.2. Offering mobile services
Offering mobile services, on the other hand could be claimed to be consumer-oriented in a sense that it relates to consumers’ situations through messages which are consumer-specific and delivered to them under certain circumstances. As an example of these services can be mentioned the check-in service through mobile phones as an intelligent SMS (iSMS) offered by Finnair (a Finnish airline). Hence, the service in the form of iSMS has the potential of meeting the relevance requirements set by consumers. Furthermore, instead of offering monetary benefits, iSMS offers consumers benefits in another form, e.g. saving consumers’ time or effort; a benefit which might be regarded more valuable than a price reduction. 

2.3. Intelligent SMS services 
Intelligent SMS, according to the developer of the application BookIT Oy, is a unique mobile transaction technology, which provides organisations with secure contacts with their customers (BookIT). Intelligent SMS is one of the innovative solutions in the dynamic field of mobile marketing and it differs from the traditional SMS in various ways. The description of the application provided by BookIT Oy has the following indications discussed in the next chapter.

The first difference compared to traditional SMS is that iSMS is consumer-specific in a sense that it is delivered to a particular end-user under certain circumstances enabled by user authentication (BookIT). These circumstances refer to consumers’ situation-related needs. This has several implications. If a company is not automatically informed about the consumer’s needs of certain services (as supposed to the Finnair’s check-in service, where the consumer communicates the need by booking a flight), applying the application requires keeping and maintaining a customer data base and using it to deliver iSMS messages to consumers at proper occasions, i.e. when the service is relevant to the consumers’ needs. On one hand, when this is done correctly the message received by the consumer is highly relevant to his situation and therefore potentially perceived favourably. On the other hand, from a service provider-perspective, this has some challenges as well; iSMS is not applicable in every circumstance. Intelligent SMS are not sent at any chosen moment to a wider audience. Therefore, the use of iSMS is limited to certain circumstances only.

The orientation to the consumer’s situation has certain benefits contributing to a second difference; besides the fact that the message might be perceived more relevant, it also has the potential to be regarded more value-adding. Different situations faced by consumers tend to raise equally differing needs depending on the specific situation at hand and meeting the consumers’ particular needs adds value for the consumers. (Grönroos 2007: 360).  

A third main difference is that the characteristics of the application allow answering the message merely by responding to the delivered message and thus do not expect any additional activities from the respondent. This and other characteristics are elaborated further later in this paper.

Considering the description of the application by BookIT Oy, this paper suggests that for the end-user of the solution, the main characteristics of iSMS are the following:
interactive feature of the message in a way that the iSMS suggests the consumer to consider his opinion or situation and respond to the message according to the consumers’ wishes.

private nature combined with the high relevance of the message enabled by the authentication technology and driven by the consumer-specific situation. 

the ease of use when responding to the message and finally, and perhaps most importantly:

the perceived benefit or value of the message content for the consumer considering that iSMS is designed to tackle particular situations, and these situations are directly connected to particular consumer needs.   

In the following chapters, the above mentioned main characteristics are covered more in detail.

3. Main characteristics of iSMS
Besides the description of the application provided by BookIT Oy, the main characteristics epitomising this application for the consumers; interactivity, privacy & relevance, ease of use as well as value-in-use are supported by the review of previous studies in the field of mobile marketing. These concepts are furthermore chosen for a more detailed investigation due to their consumer-oriented nature. In the following sections, a detailed discussion of each of the concepts is presented. 
3.1. Privacy and Relevance
There is a large volume of published studies describing the role of privacy and relevance in mobile marketing (Barnes and Scornavacca 2004, Constantiou et al. 2006) up to the extent that they could be argued to be prerequisites, rather than contributors, to mobile marketing (Anckar and D’incau 2002). For the most part, the previous studies discuss the issues related to these concepts interchangeably due to their close connections and similarly this paper joins the concepts together and discusses them under one heading. 

Both, privacy and relevance are claimed to have a significant impact on perceptions, effectiveness, success and acceptance of mobile marketing. (Barnes and Scornavacca 2004, Barwise and Strong 2002, Constantiou et al. 2006, Heinonen and Strandvik 2007, Leppäniemi and Karjaluoto 2005, among others) The salience of these constructs can be explained by the very personal and intimate nature of mobile phones; just as Heinonen and Strandvik (2007) reminds; commercial messages are benchmarked against private messages, which are naturally both private and relevant. 

Moreover, abundance of research has been conducted on the topic of permission (Barnes and Scornavacca 2004, Barwise and Strong 2002, Kavassalis, Spyropoulou, Drossos, Mitrokostas, Gikas and Hatzistamatiou 2003). On one hand consensus seems to have been reached on the positive influence of clear instructions for opting-in, and out from a service, trusting the sender as well as the negative impact of sending unsolicited messages, i.e. spam (Leppäniemi and Karjaluoto 2005, Gopal and Tripathi 2006, Dickinger and Haghirian 2004), on the other hand, some difference seems to have remained on the impact of permission. Some scholars praise permission for being the key factor in mobile marketing enabling acceptance and satisfaction (Barnes and Scornavacca, 2004, Barwise and Strong, 2002) whereas others (Heinonen and Strandvik, 2007) have some reservations stating that although beneficial, permission does not guarantee consumers paying attention to mobile marketing messages. 

This paper suggests that relevance as mobile service element is even more pivotal than privacy. One of the biggest challenges faced by marketers is how to ensure the relevance of marketing messages to various consumers (Jelassi and Enders 2004), after all relevance is consumer specific; what is relevant to one is most likely irrelevant to another (Heinonen and Strandvik 2005). If a message delivered to a mobile phone is in fact not relevant to the consumer or his situation, it will most likely be ignored (Godin 2001). 

In a similar vein, privacy and relevance are immanent in iSMS service; privacy due to the foundational technology enabling end-user recognition, i.e. DDM™ authentication, and relevance in consequence of what Anckar and D’Incau (2002) refer to time-critical needs and arrangements when identifying different settings in which mobile services can provide value for consumers. Instead of using the term time-critical needs and arrangements, this paper uses the expression situation-related needs as it is more appropriate in the context of iSMS, where communication is related to consumers’ situations, rather than urgency or immediacy as in time-critical needs. Finnair’s check-in service through iSMS is an epitome of a situation-related need. 

3.2. Interactivity
Besides privacy and relevance, interactivity is a central concept in mobile marketing enabled by special characteristics of mobile phone as a medium in mobile environment (Barnes and Scornavacca 2004). Plenty of advantages support Kavassalis’ et al. (2003) statement of interactivity being one of the top advantages of SMS; it allows conversational one-to-one marketing (Barwise and Strong 2002), gives consumers more control, improves customer satisfaction (Kumar and Zahn 2002) and relationship development (Ballentyne and Varey 2006), as well as encourages long-term transactions (Kavassalis et al. 2003). 

The primary advantage however, lies in its contributions to the success of mobile marketing endeavours; according to several studies, interactive messages are more effective and lead to higher success levels and better response rates. (Jelassi and Enders 2005). Some scholars have even argued interactivity to be a requisite for effective and lucrative mobile marketing campaigns (Kavassalis et al. 2003).

Traditionally, SMS campaigns involve sending queries, advertisements or information to consumers and usually there is only one message per session (BookIT). In iSMS, on the other hand, the message is delivered to the end-user with the purpose of being interactive; asking the end-user to consider the suggestion, whether it is a check-in possibility or a proposed time schedule and returning with some of the suggested alternatives. Moreover, the dialogue does not end here, but rather continues either in the form of confirmation, further information or personal contact. This interaction between the marketer and the consumer is facilitated by the convenience of the solution in a sense that the technique enables the end-user to respond to the message with a “one button” principle. This aspect of convenience is discussed more thoroughly in the following chapter.

3.3. Convenience
Where “servicescape” in relationship marketing literature represent interaction between the consumer, the service provider and the physical environment (Gummesson 2008), messagescape in this paper refers to interaction between the end-user and the service provider, the elements of the message content as well as the end-user’s situation in which the message is delivered. The ubiquitous phenomenon of mobile phone use means that consumers can nowadays be reached everywhere and at all times. This always on mode has certain implications for the requirements of, and the consequences of acceptable and poor adoption of mobile marketing respectively. These issues are addressed next.

SMS marketing has been claimed to be an attractive alternative for marketers due to the channel’s several valuable features. (Kavassalis et al. 2003) Using it wisely could nevertheless be argued somewhat challenging. The existing literature has demonstrated that messagescape, should fulfil e.g. some of the following requirements: messages ought to be short, concise and straight to the point, the content should be funny, entertaining or informative, the service system should be customer-friendly and manageable to avoid any discomfort, furthermore, it should be relevant to the target group and delivered at a suitable time and at appropriate frequency. (Barwise and Strong 2002, Dickinger et al. 2004, Gummesson 2008)

In a similar vein, these requirements regarding the content, the delivery of the message, the ease of use interface, timeliness and frequency have been established to influence consumer perceptions of mobile marketing (Barwise and Strong 2002) of which particularly ease of use has been demonstrated to further facilitate the adoption of mobile services (Constantiou et al. 2006). 

Intelligent SMS contributes to the convenience of the channel by introducing “one button principle” (BookIT). This method allows the end-user to respond to the message by choosing from the answer alternatives and then by responding to the message by pressing that particular alternative key, e.g. A, B or C, and sending the message to the same address the message was delivered from, hence making the solution easy for the consumer to use. 

During the dialogue, the end-user is not required to register as a user, remember any service numbers, keywords or passwords, neither is the end user expected to shift to another platform to complete the communication. Consistent with this notion of convenience is what Barwise and Strong (2002) discovered when exploring the effectiveness of text messaging and learning that if a response from the consumer was expected, it should be made as simple and effortless and not involving another platform.  

3.4. Value perspective
Central to the entire discipline of marketing is the concept of value. Although central and largely studied, value is a challenging concept to define due to its personal and individual nature (Grönroos 2010, Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2004). Since value as a concept is so elusive (Vargo, Maglio and Akaka 2008), it is difficult to determine what precisely adds value to different consumers; for some value is monetary-related, for some it might be entertainment whereas for some it might be saved time and convenience. 

Zeithaml already in the late 1980s discussed the difficulty of conceptualizing the value concept in his research on consumer perceptions of price, quality and value. He identified four differing consumer definitions of value and synthesised them into one overall definition: “perceived value is the consumer’s overall assessment of the utility of a product based on perceptions of what is received and what is given” (Zeithaml 1988, p. 14). Out of existing concepts, two general meanings of value; value-in-exchange and value-in-use are stated to reflect the nature of value and value creation (Vargo et al. 2008) of which the first could be argued to represent the classic economic theory and the latter the later emerged service marketing paradigm. 

During past several decades, the emphasis of marketing paradigm shifted from goods to services, from products to processes, from transactions to interactions, from exchanges to experiences, and finally from value embedded in products into value co-creation and value-in-use (Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2004, Vargo and Lusch 2004). Briefly, from goods based marketing into service marketing. In the same vein, the field of mobile marketing could be said to follow the same transition; shifting from promoting offerings into offering services. 

In the case of iSMS and Finnair’s check in service, the consumer checks himself to a flight simply by answering a text message, thereby managing to save time and effort since he escapes queuing at the check-in counter. For frequent fliers especially, this benefit of saving time and effort is significant. The access to the service has therefore been improved. Saving customers’ time and effort are likewise claimed to be common benefits of market-creating innovations (Berry et al. 2006). 

Hereby, this paper suggests that the characteristics epitomising iSMS; interactivity, privacy & relevance, convenience as well as value perspective, all influence the end-user perceptions towards offering mobile services and hence support adopting this new way of approaching mobile marketing activities.
