Investigation of the Loyalty of Finns in Purchasing Domestic Products in Helsinki Area
1. Introduction
In the contemporary business, customer loyalty becomes increasingly important for the success of a company. That is, customer loyalty contributes benefits to the company: the repeated or regular purchasing behavior, customer’s word-of-mouth communication, as well as their innovative ideas. The company, therefore can keep a long term relationship with the current customer, and attract new customers at a lower cost.

As Grönroos has claimed, different from the traditional transaction marketing, the marketing from a service perspective means that customers have the more power—from the value creation to value usage. For the traditional trasaction marketing, ‘the focus is to create purchases and singular exchanges (or transaction).’ (2007, 24) From the service marketing perspective that customers nowadays are dominant in value creation and the company has became the co-creator.  It means that to maintain long term customer relationships is essential, and thereby the customer loyalty should always be taken into account. To explore the loyalty of Finns in purchasing domestic product will help companies get deeper insight on Finnish customers, and correspondingly adopt appropriate marketing strategies.

The topic of this study is ‘Investigation the loyalty of Finns in purchasing domestic products in Helsinki area’. There is no related previous research, so to answer the research question ‘Are Finnish people in Helsinki area loyal to their domestic products?’ can offer a fresh understanding about Finnish customers in Helsinki area.

In this report, marketing development based theories will be reviewed first. In the empirical part, the chosen of research method, the design of the study will be described. In section 4, the main findings will be discussed. At the end, the conclusion of this study, as well as some suggestion about managerial implementation and evaluation of this study will be presented. 

This paper hopes to confirm the pattern ‘Finnish people are loyal to domestic products’, and show the reasons-- proof or countering facts.  Eisenhardt has pointed out that “In replication logic, cases which confirm emergent relations enhance confidence in the validity of the relationships. Cases which disconfirm the relationships often can provide an opportunity to refine and extend the theory.” (Eisenhardt 1989:536-542) Therefore, the study can contribute fruitful findings, either confirm or disconfirm the research question.

2. Theoretical review
Because this is an inductive study, which has no former research or other theories that related to the loyalty of Finn’s in purchasing domestic products. But in this section, I will briefly introduce the underlying theories of the development of marketing to justify the importance of this study.


There are two different perspectives in marketing area: the transaction and relationship marketing.  The transaction marketing emphasizes the exchange of value, for example the products and money. And the relationship marketing emphasizes the ongoing relationship between parties within the marketplace. According to Grönroos, “Since the 1970s the exchange of value, for example physical products, for money has been considered the core phenomenon in marketing. According to this view, marketing is planned and implemented to facilitate the exchange of products for money.” (2007: 23-24) and then “…a new marketing approach has emerged based on the notion that interactions between service providers or suppliers of goods and industrial buyers and their customers—buyer-seller interactions—are important elements in marketing, because the way these interactions are managed has an impact on the purchasing behavior of customers.” (2007:24)

In the one hand, with the transaction marketing perspective, suppliers or manufacturers create values for customers that the customer may or may not participate to the value creation process. In the other hand, with the relationship marketing perspective, customers are dominant in value creation. Producers participate as value co-creator, and the possibility of the producers’ participation is based on the customer’s choice. 

For example, the milk used to be produced by milk manufacture that aims at the value exchange of the milk product and the money. Customers buy milk but they don’t participate to the producing process. When consider the products from Ikea that is a customer want a table, she/he need the supported materials that produced by the Ikea factory, and further construct the table by themselves. It means the customer participates to the producing process of this table. When the relationship marketing perspective is adopted to consider the production of the table, it is the customer, who makes the choice to use the material of Ikea that let Ikea involved within the value creation process. Then the company stands as a service provider and an assistant for the customer’s value creation.

“…the service process leads to some form of cooperation between customer and service provider. A customer relationship may emerge. If this relationship is not satisfactory to the customer, the exchange of value for money stops.” (Grönroos 2007: 25) It is true that when considering all the tangible products as a part of the assistant service that company offers to the customer’s value creation, customer always has the right to start or terminate a relationship with the company. And further, Grönroos has pointed out “the mass marketing approach is now less effective and less profitable…New customers are more and more difficult to find. Therefore, it is becoming increasingly important to keep a firm’s existing customers. In many businesses, customers become profitable only after they have remained customer for some times.” (2007:26) 

Only continuous satisfied customers have the possibility to maintain relations with companies. And this maintain of relationship is, in another word, customer’s loyalty to the company. The loyalty of customers is essential for the profit and success of a company. That’s why companies should gain better understanding the effectiveness of a shopping culture on customer’s choice of purchasing, and further on the relationship between the customer and the company.
3. Empirical study
The topic of this study is “Investigation of loyalty of Finns in purchasing domestic products in Helsinki area”. And because there are no related theories, nor former research on this topic, the research problem is defined as attempt to gain better understating of the purchasing pattern of Finns. The research question is “Are Finnish people in Helsinki area loyal to their domestic product?”

3.1 Sampling strategy
At the very beginning, an observation is conducted as exploratory study, which offers me better thoughts of structure the interview in further. The “confirming and disconfirming cases” is adopted as the sampling strategy of this study. Because in the one hand, the existence of the pattern of the loyalty of Finns in purchasing domestic products has not been proved; in the other hand, not only the confirmatory cases can be extra example of the emergent patterns, but also the disconfirming ones can be the contrary interpretations and may help define the boundaries that between the confirming and disconfirming situations. It means that if the pattern can be confirmed by the observation and interview, the richness of information and depth of understanding will be increased; once the pattern is disconfirmed, I believe the respondent can offer other important information or a new angle to help me learn about Finns shopping culture.

Because the richness of information is not determined by the number of sample but by the depth of the research and analysis, and the limited number of cases can be easily generate deep and concentrate analysis: only one respondent for the observation and interview is pre-selected based on the purpose of study. A Finnish girl who was born and grown up in Helsinki area suit for the study purpose: the investigation among the Finnish customer in Helsinki area.  Both parents of the respondent are Finnish, which means there is no culture influence come from her family. Her major is English and her personality is suitable for the research background. Because Helsinki is a multi-cultural city, and the respondent herself has certain openness to the combined culture. And furthermore, if this typical case confirms the existence of the pattern that Finns has loyalty in purchasing domestic products, the finding will be reliable and persuasive; if the pattern is disconfirmed by this respondent, there could raise further research problems that concentrate about the Finnish younger customers.


3.2 Observation 
The aim of the observation is to get general understanding and seek the emerging pattern of Finnish customer’s shopping. The shopping type of the observation and interview is predefined as daily consumed commodities. Because based on the routine purchasing, the pattern is easier to be detected and tested. The observation was taken place in a supermarket for that the supermarket is a common place for customer purchasing groceries, and thereby the richness of the categories of product as well as the volume of the customer flow is guaranteed.  

In order to guarantee the reliability and the validity, time and place of the observation is typical sampling, for that it was the respondent decides the observation should take place at her typical shopping time, and in her frequently visited supermarket. I didn’t produce any intervention for the respondent’s choice to ensure the objectiveness of the study. An approximately 45 minute’s observation was conducted at 4:45pm-5:30pm, Friday, the 18th February, 2011. The public setting of the observation is K-market, which locates in Pllaksentie 4, Helsinki, Finland.

There were two options of the observation: observe the respondent or observe with the respondent. Due to the respondent has already done her shopping for that week based on her travel plan, I chose the second option: observe with the respondent. We acted as outsider to avoid the possibility that the presence of observer may change the situation in the public setting.

The major method of information recoding during the observation were photographing and field notes. While the photograph can capture the movement of the participants, their facial express, and body gesture and so on; the field note can record the hint s that can be combined with the pictures later on to remind the researcher some details of the situation. The respondent took all the photos and I made the field notes. The field note is based on the structure that I pre-set that in order to avoid the missing of some meaningful aspects that caused by the uncertainty of the situation. 

The whole observation has two directions: the customer’s behaviour and the supplier’s behaviour. The customer’s behaviour emphasis the process of decision making of the customers, including the reading of the detailed information of products, the comparison, the discussion, and other unconscious facial expression and body language, and so forth. The supplier’s behaviour means the division of product sections, the position of the selves, the position of the product on the shelves, the promotion clues, and so on. 

3.3 Interview 
Thought the observation has helped me to get a general understanding about the situation of the Finnish customer’s shopping, the deeper understanding and insights should rely on the interview. The interview design is based on the study purpose and the information gathered by the observation. A well designed interview can help the researcher well explore the respondent inner feelings, motives, or emotions, etc. The purpose of the interview is to get deeper understanding and insights about the customer’s experience and feelings.

My interview was semi-structured. It means that I only had basic guidelines that including some key issues and elements I need to study, rather than pre-designed specific questions. To reveal the respondent’s purchasing behaviour of buying domestic products, and the reasons that she buy or don’t buy, the interview guide involves: the influence of personal general perception to the domestic products, the satisfaction affection, the environment influence, the influence that from marketing communication, and so on. And the guidelines were designed to make sure the richness of information and the relevant of the interview to the study purpose. 

The interview was conducted from 5:00 to 6:00pm, Sunday, 27th February 2011. The interview was started with the background question, and then following by probing question, like “could you tell me about your last experience of shopping?” The following questions are not only based on the directions that list on my interview guide, also based on the answer the respondent gave to me. Except at the beginning of the interview, I didn’t arrange the specific questions. The reason is that I prefer to form or shift the questions based on the respondent’s reaction to the former questions, the atmosphere, and the respondent’s emotional reaction towards the interviewer and the interview: the questions can be flexible and responsive. And besides, open-ended questions can offer me better view of the issues that the respondent cares or interests the most. Therefore, the format of the interview questions involves both carefully wordy questions and open-ended questions. 

After the observation the respondent already knew about the purpose of my study, she shows activeness and passion on my research topic. Thereby during the interview, she actively shared her feelings, experiences and knowledge with me. And during the whole process of interview, I acted as a humble learner, which makes the atmosphere easier to manage. The respondents did the most of the talking; I gave suitable responses and reaction. Besides the elements that listed on my interview guide, the respondent offered some other angle of insights that could influence the purchasing behaviour of Finnish customers.
4. Analysis and findings
There are two parts in this section: the analysis of the observation, and the analysis of the interview. The analysis of the observation offered the partial basis of the interview guideline design, and will be cross-compared with the analysis of the interview that attempt to make the findings of the study more valid and reliable. 

4.1 Observation analysis
Based on the field note and the pictures, there are some main issues emerged: 
[Table]
I have inspired by the observation to determine what kind of information I should search for the upcoming interview: the interview guideline thereby was formed. I also have raised couple of questions that need to add to the interview guideline: “would the purchasing decision making differ from gender?” and “if the loyalty of Finns in purchasing domestic products differs from age?” 

4.2 interview analysis
During the interview analysis, firstly the constructs (key words appeared in mentioned by the respondent), which are the basic elements of consideration when Finnish customer make purchasing decision. And then these constructs were scaled based on the bipolar dimensions. The following figure will show the constructs as well as the dimensional ranges.
[Table]

After the dimensionalization, in the integration of the conceptual elements (constructs), the map shows the relationships of these major constructs. Then the pattern of the Finnish customer’s decision making is clearly represented.
[Figure]
4.3 Findings
There are three main findings based on the data analysis: the difference of the preference of buying domestically produced product among different age; Finnish customers like trying the new products; and the general pattern of Finnish customer’s decision making confirm the preference in purchasing domestic products rather than the loyalty.

The difference of preference caused by age: firstly, from the observation, it was quite clear that older customers (>40 years old) are more possible than the younger customers that conducting routing purchasing. When they enter to the supermarket, they already got clear aims, and very rational on making choice. It can be say that older Finnish generation has the loyalty in purchasing domestic products, but younger customers only have the preference in purchasing domestic products.

And then according to the respondent of the interview, it was confirmed that the majority of the younger people are not as loyal as the older generations for the following reasons: (a) the major reason. The limitation of the income that may make their purchase budget lower than the older people, at the same time Finnish products are generally expensive than foreign products, so the younger customers cannot afford the loyalty in purchasing domestic products. (b) The openness of mindset of the foreign products, as the respondent herself, that make the younger generation care less about products’ country of origin. (c) The younger customers understand better about the secret of the marketing communication activities that sometimes they do not actually believe, for example, the slogan of the mass marketing, and even they doubt the truth of the information delivered through the media, and so forth.

Although the younger customers are not loyal to domestic products, they do prefer buying domestic products: the respondent pointed out that if the price difference is not big, younger customers also normally buy domestic products. And there’s also another reason for younger customers buying domestic products: ecological reason. It means there is a certain group of customers believe that the nearer place the products are manufactured, the more ecological of the products. 

Finnish customer like trying new products: there is no age difference on the favor of the trial of new products. When Finnish customers intend to try new products, they always read the detailed instruction very carefully, and compare with other interested products. But I didn’t find the supplier’s promotion worked very effectively: the Finnish customers still keep rationale when making a trial. Then the information on the package influences their decisions a lot. If the information shows that the product is from Finland, the quality is considered good, and also the price of the product in the trial stage is normally lower, then the possibility for all Finnish customer buy the new product is larger. If the new product is produce in foreign country, as long as it with a famous brand, or a reasonable price, it still attracts the younger Finnish customers to buy. Otherwise, it is difficult to guess. 

The decision making process of Finns: this finding is closely related to the previous two findings. The Figure 2 clearly conclude the rationale map that how Finnish customer proceed the product information. The most influenced factor is the price, when the price is reasonable and acceptable, the Finnish customers in all the age level would prefer domestic products. The second influential factor is country of origin: it means that, when the Finnish product is too expensive to afford, Finns will check the foreign products based on the country of origin. For example, if the cheese comes from France, and the customers know that France is famous on cheese, then the cheese is probably bought even it’s not Finnish cheese. The third level of influential factors is ecological issues and taste. It is hard to distinguish which one of these two factors is more important than the other. Because some of the customers prefer the better taste, some others prefer the ecological issues. 


5. Conclusion and discussion
This study lasts one and a half months. The original purpose of the study is attempting to confirm or disconfirm the pattern that Finns are loyal in purchasing domestic products. After the observation, the direction of the study somehow changed a little: because based on the exploratory observation, there emerged couple of patterns, but none of them are direct closed to the pattern of loyal in purchasing domestic products. Then the interview is designed based on both the original aim and the information gathered from the observation, in order to gain better understanding about not only the loyalty issues, but also about the emerged patterns from the observation.

After the observation and interview analysis, it was fortune that through the cross comparison of the observation and interview analysis, the preference of Finnish customers, among all age levels, in purchasing domestic product. And the older generation’s passion, emotional and rational support for the domestic products is confirmed. The variety of the younger customer’s decision making is preliminary emerged during this study, and then some of the reason also was revealed during the interview. 

Back to the empirical part, where I mentioned the reason for sampling: the confirming cases can offer extra example and increase the richness and reliability of the emerging pattern; the disconfirming cases can draw the boundaries around the pattern. Due to the fact that this study only partially confirmed the pattern: the existence of loyalty of Finns in purchasing domestic products only within the older customer group. Then the boundary is drawn: the major boundary of the difference between the older people’s loyalty and younger people’s preference is not the age, but the price.

Some suggestions for managerial implications: (a) For Finnish companies: since the Finns already perceive that the Finnish products are better than others, and they check the package and read the detailed information when comparing products. The Finnish companies can take the package into consideration when doing marketing, for example: make the “produced in Finland” label or indication clear and striking. And try to design smaller size of package of products when in the promotion or new product trial with comparatively lower price that may attract Finnish customers buy more. (b) For foreign companies: it is better if the foreign brand of product can be produced in Finland or near Finland, for that certain number of customers take the ecological issues in to account. And also if the Product is labelled as “produced in Finland”, it will get more interest and attention from Finnish customers. (c) There is a crucial fact that the material and labour prices in Finland is high, so the price of the product is high, and then another option for foreign companies is to emphasis on the publication rather than mass marketing or promotion. Because Finnish customers are rational, the healthy, ecological, environment or even political issues are focused by them. By largely promoting the products or competing by price is not possible to persuade Finnish customers; in the contrary, Finns could think the quality of the products in lower price is not as good as the products in higher price.  

Discussion of the study limitations: (a) the adopted research method is qualitative method that the method itself has some limitations. For example, the most important issue could be the bias of the researcher. Although during the whole study process I tried to keep objective, some personal opinions also can be involved unconsciously in the design of the observation and especially of the interview.  (b) Because the limitation of time, the sample size is only one respondent. Though according to many professional in the qualitative research area that the number of sample is not the problem, but there still is the possibility that I chose the inappropriate respondent that the whole study went wrong. (c) Because the interview is semi-structured, and the majority of the questions are open-ended questions, it was difficult to control the relevance of the interview to the study purpose. Sometimes the topic has gone irrelevant with the study. (d) The researcher herself is lack of experience to conduct a qualitative study. This is the first time she does an interview that she lacks of interview skills that also may influence the validity of the information. For example if she leads too much when asking questions, the respondent then would give untruthful answers, and so forth.
