Easiness in Buying

1 Introduction


Buying and consumer behavior has been studied extensively, especially the phenomena
consumer convenience. Time is a limited resource for consumers. Discussion around
conveniences has been revolving around consumer's need to save time and effort when
buying products or services (Kelley 1958; Anderson and Shugan 1991; Berry, Seiders
and Grewal 2002).

Convenience has been used also in the words "convenience foods" or "convenience
goods" Copeland (1923:282). Convenience products or services can save consumer's
time and effort in supplier's thinking, but in practise they might cause inconvenience
from consumer point of view. For example self-service check-in at airport using
machines save supplier's resource costs and consumer's time if the tools work when
needed. However, when tools do not work they require more time and effort from
consumer.

Zeithaml (1988) discusses sacrifices instead of conveniences. In her view people
sacrifice time and non-monetary resources in buying. On the other hand consumers
receive products or services in exchange. According to Zeithaml (1988) when consumer's sacrifices decrease increases the perceived value of the product for the consumer.

Extensive research on what makes consumer's buying experience easy from consumer's
point of view is scarce. Easy buying is used often as a slogan in internet sales, for
example it is written on Amazon web pages: "Placing an order with Amazon.com is
easy" (Amazon 2010). In practise consumers test this slogan and experience the buying
easy or difficult. The questions arise: Is easiness in buying related to the increased
perceived value or to the smaller amount of total sacrifices or something else? Hence,
the area need to be further studied.
  
1.1 Research problem and purpose of the study

Literature search was performed to find theories related to consumer's easiness in
buying. Academic articles were searched through search tools (such as EBSCO), using
several keywords such as "buying", "consumer/s" and "buying" with its synonym
words (purchasing, shopping), "easiness in buying/purchasing", "buying easy",
"purchasing easy". The aim of the literature search was to identify what has been
written about easiness in buying earlier and what aspects influence consumer buying
behaviour, especially what makes consumer's buying easy. Consumer behaviour and
buying has been researched extensively, however academic papers on "easiness in
buying" could not be found and it is assumed by researcher that research does not exist
at the moment.

The purpose of this paper is to discuss using un-directly related theories theories what
could explain consumer's experience on easy buying. Consumer buying has been
studied a lot, but it is not well understood what makes buying easy or difficult to
consumers. This discussion could help companies to understand consumers'point of
view better and as a consequence serve them better and increase company's profits.

1.2 Research Questions

Purpose of this study to find answers to the following research questions: 1) What is
easiness in buying? 2) What could explain easy buying?

Easiness in buying has not been yet defined, that is why a tentative concept is provided
according to the theoretical knowledge. Second, it is discussed what could explain
phenomena easy buying. Consumer buying is a wide area. In this discussion aim is to
choose the main factors that could explain easy buying. Third, the possible
consequences of easy buying are discussed.

1.3 Delimitations

The paper focuses to consumer's easy buying, but not consumer's buying behaviour in
general. The buying process is perceived holistically what happens before, during and
after buying. However, consumer's value in use is excluded.
 
In this study "consumers" are perceived to be people who buy products or services in
the business to consumer (B2C) context.

"Buying" refers in this paper to consumer buying items or services. Close existing
words are "purchasing" and "shopping". Shopping refers to buying, but also to items
bought in shops (Hornby 1995).

2 Easy - Difficult buying 
Discussion on what is "easy" and what is "difficult" -> consumer perception on buying
Referring to Berry etc. others

3 Consumer Sacrifices

Convenience literature has concentrated on time, financial resources, endeavour and
energy that people spend when they acquire products or services. Zeithaml (1988) has
called consumer's time and effort as "sacrifices" instead of conveniences. People do not
think only of monetary costs, but also other perceived sacrifices such as the time
consumer spends when obtaining product as well the mental costs and search costs that
occur. Consumer's perceived sacrifices influence how product's value is perceived.
According to Zeithaml (1988) the perceived value is an evaluation by consumer about
the overall benefits of the product. The evaluation is influenced by consumer's
perception what is given and what is received back, those perceptions can be referred
also as salient give and get components to consumer. In other words consumer sacrifices
time, effort, and other resources when buying. Then consumer evaluates the costs (not
only monetary) and creates perceived value perception. This definition about giving and
receiving back might appear that people calculate carefully benefits and costs of the
product or service. In view of Zeithaml (1988) consumer's perception of value can be
increased for example if financial and non-financial costs decrease. In other words when
consumers experience's perception is that there are less total sacrifices the perceived
value increases for consumer.
 
3.1 Image

In this chapter image is discussed through examples of studies made on image and it's
influence on consumers.

In this study image is defined as perception that consumers have about a company, is
company perceived positively or negatively. The definition is close to Keh and Zieh
(2009) definition of company reputation. The same authors studied how company
reputation affects on customer buying behavior. The writers claim that positive
company reputation affects on customer's trust towards company and how ready they
are to pay higher prices. Furthermore, if a company's reputation is good, customers
perceive the company positively such as reliable, proficient and ethical. In real life
company reputation can change to negative very quickly; Keh and Xie (2009) give an
example about Enron. Another example could be case of Lehman Brothers, where
company's reputation was ruined rapidly. Consumer's are concerned also about
company's reputation. For company bad reputation means loosing customers and profit.
In this study consumer's share their buying experiences. Assumption in the stories
company's image and trust towards company are also covered in those discussions.

Mall image was studied by Chebat, Sirgy and Grzeskowiak (2010). According to their
thinking, if consumers perceive a mall's image to be strong, it can help to attract more
visitors to the mall. Chebat et al. (2010) suggest that management of a mall should carry
out marketing research concerning the five "mall image dimensions" that relate to
customer's access to the mall, how is the atmosphere in the mall and price level. Access
has to do with how consumers perceive for example the availability of parking lots.
Further dimensions are related to how consumers perceive the mall's assortments (such
as wideness of the assortment, how consumer perceives the amount of services and
goods in the mall). Furthermore, for consumer's convenience it is important how
extensive they perceive the availability of product sizes, brand, and colours (736). In
Chebat, Sirgy and Csreskowiak (2010) management has the responsibility to follow up
the consumer's perceived mall image and take actions accordingly.

The question is how the image is developed and can company influence image
(Grönroos 2007: 343). For example companies advertise towards consumers and this
affects to the image that is created in consumer's mind. However, consumer can have an
image about company already before becoming a customer for the company.

3.2 Accessibility

It is crucial that consumers can access the service and it functions, which does not
always happen regardless of the way of accessing. According to Berry et al. (2002)
consumers perceive that they use effort and time when accessing to services. That is
defined as access convenience. Consumer's access can take place in many ways: by
phone, online, visiting service or using self-service technologies. Meuter, Bitner,
Ostrom and Brown (2005) give examples on self-service technologies such as
possibility to pay at the pump when tanking a car, automatic banking machines,
electronic check-out from hotel, banking through the phone and transactions in internet.

3.3 Service Encounter

Consumers interact with suppliers during buying. The interaction is referred to as
service encounter. Surprenant and Solomon (1987) interpret the term "service
encounter" as a "dyadic interaction between a customer and a service provider." This
approach sees interaction taking place in two ways. In this study the service encounter
is seen as a two way interaction similar to Suprenant and Salomon (1987), because both
parties, consumer and service provider need to interact to make actual buying happen.
From consumer's point of view service encounters are critical, because according to
service encounter experiences consumer creates an idea of the company and how easy is
it to interact with the company.

Consumers' emotions during the interactions with their supplier affect consumer
behaviour. Ladhari claims (2007) that consumer's emotions have an affect on consumer's 
behavior after buying. According to this concept feelings "pleasure" and "arousal"
influence significantly to word of mouth communication. According to this author,
"pleasure" relates to feelings of joyful, happy or contented and "arousal" person's
feeling awake, stimulated, alert or active in encounter (1087). On the other hand service
personnel's behavior influences the consumer. Wang (2009) claims that the positive
emotions that service personnel show during the service encounter have an impact on
consumer's positive view towards brand, satisfaction with the employees and re-
purchase intentions.

3.4 Supportiveness

In this paper supportiveness refers to the perceived support that consumer receives from
the service provider during buying. Consumers need to decide what to buy from where.
Choosing a product or service selection process can be overwhelming from consumer's
point of view. Diehl and Poynor (2010) call this a choice overload. These authors
propose that neither big or small assortment of products is good from consumers point
of view. Reasons for this perception are that when consumers have small choice their
assumption is that they cannot find the product they wish. On the other hand according
to Diehl and Poynor (2010) when amount of expands consumers view that they can
better select their preferred product and experience dissatisfaction if they cannot find
what they are looking for (312). Service providers can support the consumers in the
selection. A practical example is a chat service for consumers in the company web
pages. Ikea uses on their local home pages "online assistants" that answer consumers in
their questions related to products or services (http://www.ikea.com/gb/en/) From
service provider's view the purpose is to facilitate the choice of consumer. The general
question is how consumers perceive support. Does it help them to make choices? Would
consumer perceive buying easier or even more difficult?

4 Tentative Framework for Easiness in Buying

One objective in this study is conceptualise "easiness in buying" and build a model,
which shows what factors could influence consumer's buying experience.

The Figure X, tentative framework for "Easiness in Buying" is put forward in Figure 1.
It displays what factors can explain how consumers perceive easiness in buying.
Explaining factors chosen from literature discussed earlier in this paper: Image,
Sacrifices, Accessibility, Service Encounter and Supportiveness.   The factors as
important as the others, i.e. none is more important than the other. It is also important to
note that this model does not include all the factors that explain easy buying, but the
ones that are selected according to literature.

Summarise here the theories
+ Easy buying is = ?
 
4 Discussion

Consequences of Easy buying
Consumer's experience on easy buying can affect on relationship between consumer
and company. According to Ravald and Grönroos (1996).
Write here about the customer-perceive value / episode / benefits / sacrifices