Building an underground brand

Introduction
Established markets are often controlled by a small amount of big brands, which newfound brands may find hard to compete with directly. Big brands have a tendency to please a large amount of the market with their product, however this leaves smaller customer segments out of the target group. 
By targeting a niche market, created in the spaces created in between the big brands ruling the market, newfound brands or smaller divisions in larger companies are able to avoid competing directly with the bigger brands(Kahn;Kalwani;& Morrison, 1988)(Doyle, 2012). This way new brands or products have the opportunity to control a whole segment within the market (Doyle, 2012). Brands concurring these niches may be called niche brands, lifestyle brands or underground brands(Kahn;Kalwani;& Morrison, 1988).
Modern communication platforms have altered the composition of markets, creating a global marketplace. The same characteristics still apply, but in a greater scale. This switch in scale has revolutionized the settings in niche markets. The formerly small markets now have large global audiences. Small segment products now have the possibility reach out for a big customer volume and gain control of this segment of the market, thus making niche markets more attractive.
Underground brands controlling niche markets are closely related to lifestyle brands, which have their roots in lifestyle movements and communities and tribal behavior (e.g. snowboarding, skateboarding and music styles).The build up of lifestyle brands and underground brands has lately been topics of discussion; still only few studies have been conducted in this area. Thus, there is a lack of relevant research examining the building processes and characteristics of underground brands. The switch in market size within the segments these underground brands act in, creating global niche markets underlines that further research in this field is well motivated. 


Research question and limitations
This research will aim to study the underlying processes driving the creation of underground brands and examine if there are some characteristics stigmatizing the underground brands and the surroundings they act in. 
Due to the limited time reserved for the research, there are some limits regarding the depth and scope of the research. The research will be limited to Finish brands acting in the clothing industry. The clothing industry is a context where tribal behavior plays a central role, thus being a well-motivated segment of research. 

Method
The study will be conducted through open interviews made with local underground brands acting in the clothing industry. The data gathered will be analyzed through a theoretical framework consisting of studies conducted in the fields of brand building and underground/lifestyle brands. 
Theoretical framework
In this part of the study a theoretical framework for the study will be created. The theoretical framework is based in literature and studies conducted in the field of underground brands, brand building theory, lifestyle brands and tribal behavior.

The brand
This part of the theoretical framework will explain what a brand is, how it is created and managed.

Niche brands
A niche is “a part of the market which is the domain of specialists” (Peter Moles, 2012). In other words, a delimited space on the market where competition is not as strong as in the market segment generally (Doyle, 2012). By targeting and specializing in a niche market a brand may be able to control a large share of the specific market (Doyle, 2012).

According to Kahn et al. (Kahn;Kalwani;& Morrison, 1988) niche brands can be seen as brands with a lower level of penetration and a higher level of loyalty than expected for its market share in the segment. Suggesting underground brands or niche brands have a strong and loyal customer base, but are not familiar to the larger audience. 

Tribalism
The postmodern society is labeled by increased individualism in western countries. Traditional social and cultural groups have become less important to people in western countries. The development of communication platforms, commerce and industry has nurtured a fragmentation of society. (Cova & Cova, 2002)
This has led to the formation of other social communities through which individuals are able to identify themselves and satisfy their need of belonging to a community. Tribes are communities, which consist of individuals that share not only interests, but also strong emotional links and a common sub-culture. (Cova & Cova, 2002)(Moutinho;Dionisio;& Leal, 2007)

The influence of modern communication



Interviews
Discussion

Conclustion

Further research


     
