How Does Insider Trading Affect Shareholder Value in Finland?
Introduction

The trade of financial instruments using inside or non-public information has since the aftermath of the Great Depression been forbidden in the United States. The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 that specifies the insider trading regulations still applies, and it has not changed much since. However, questions regarding the sanity of the strict regulation have arisen, with Manne (1966) publishing the paper: ‘In Defence of Insider Trading’, where the Securities Exchange Commission’s (SEC) regulatory actions are viewed as a “real disservice to the American shareholder” (p. 122). Moreover, Milton Friedman later noted: “You want more insider trading, not less.” (http://www.pbs.org/) 
Even though the financial crisis of 2008 dampened the discussion, the debate between regulators and critics of the strict legislation is still ongoing. The monetary nature of the market in the US makes for a more lively discussion than in the fiscal markets of northern Europe, and as such the opposition against the regulators in Finland is not as strong. However, the relatively loose control poses the question whether the system works as it is or not.
Since the adoption of insider trading regulations in Finland in 1989, there have been a few court rulings on the issue, which will be discussed in greater detail in the following sections. Differences in legislative systems, especially compared to the US common law, will be in focus, and combined with the previous research in the area, the effects of informed trading on the Finnish stock market can be analyzed. 
Aim
The aim of this paper is to analyze insider trading regulations in Finland, and to determine how potential insider trades affect minority shareholder value and the market as a whole.
Structure of the paper
After an introduction to the insider trading debate in sections 1 and 2, important pieces of previous research will be reviewed in section 3. Sections 4 and 5 focus on the legal system and previous court rulings in Finland, where after a summarizing discussion follows in section 6.
The insider trading debate
The debate between regulatory authorities and liberals striving for loosened regulation is more commonly referred to as the insider trading debate (Hu & Noe (1997)). The government enforcing the regulation is protecting outside shareholders and the overall stability of the market, whereas corporate lobbyists and a portion of the academic community argue that legalized insider trading would increase overall market efficiency by sooner reflecting new information in asset prices. On the modern financial markets of today though, information is king, and any market participant acting based on inferior information has a considerable disadvantage.
Arguments for deregulation
The paper: ‘In Defence of Insider Trading’, by Manne in 1966, is one of the first papers questioning the logic behind the SEC’s strict regulation in the USA, and though the markets have developed vastly in the decades since the time of publishing, the same points still apply. He argued that regulation creates inefficiency as new information is published with a considerable delay, whereby the markets do not act quickly enough. Legalized insider trading, however, would cure the problem as any employee or manager with unpublished information could make arbitrage gains until markets reach the equilibrium price, thereby increasing efficiency. Moreover, as the access to inside information is economically beneficial for the managers, it would become part of their normal compensation. As such corporations could utilize a greater portion of their wealth on positive NPV projects. Additionally, it is argued that compensation for entrepreneurial managers does not function as it is, because taking risks and inventing something brilliant would not benefit the decision makers personally. Gains from inside information, however, would give managers an incentive to take risks from which positive stock market reactions occur.
As a result it can be concluded that there are apparent benefits of legalized insider trading that keep the debate going, and one of the main points of Manne’s paper was to make the public aware of that there are alternative views to those put forth by the regulators.
Arguments for continued regulation
In most developed financial markets the trade of financial instruments using inside or non-public information is illegal, and this section of the paper presents the main points behind the rationale of the strict legislation.
If some market participants had access to information that was not available to everyone, the ones acting based on inferior information would eventually be driven out of the market. As such, even on the simple ethical grounds of fairness, utilizing inside information for ones economic benefit is wrong. Additionally, based on the fact that a large portion of liquidity traders and market professionals would be driven out of the market (Hu & Noe (1997)), the overall amount of traders would decline; resulting in widened bid-ask spreads and reduced liquidity on the market. The reduced quality of minority shareholder protection, however, would have additional consequences, including difficulties in raising capital for corporations. If investors felt that they are unprotected by the law, they were to require a premium for the additional risk, making equity capital more expensive for corporations: the consequences of which would be felt on a macroeconomic level.
Previous research
Maug, Ernst (2002) 
In the paper: Insider Trading Legislation and Corporate Governance, from 2002, Maug creates a model on how insider trading legislation affects corporate governance as a whole. The aim of the paper is to determine how changes in the legislation would affect corporate policies and practices in the top management, and how different shareholder clienteles would utilize potential inside information that more or less directly would be conveyed from the managers. The paper focuses on economies using a civil-law system, and as such considerable similarities with the Nordic countries’ and more specifically Finland’s investor behavior are expected. 
A major difference between EU and US legislative systems that Maug finds, is that whereas the SEC –rules in the US do not clearly define shareholders as potential ‘tippees’ utilizing indirect information, the European legislation is more comprehensive by including dominant shareholders in the insider register. On the other hand, EU legislation is not as specific when it comes to defining what is inside information as the US.
The results of the paper clearly indicate that given a scenario of lacking statutory intervention, the managers will together with the major dominant shareholders form what Maug refers to as a “cozy cartel”: an agreement from which both involved parties benefit at the expense of minor shareholders. The argument, Maug claims, relies on the liquidity of the markets, and on the shareholder with access to inside information being more concerned about the trading profits than on a long-run return on the initial investment. The management of the corporation would in turn get their gains in the shape of freedom to act: if the dominant shareholders are after trading profits, the executives are free to do whatever they like. Moreover, the author claims that if inside trading was to be legalized, a way to reduce the harmful effects could be increased transparency of larger individual trades. The problem is, however, that the major shareholders’ interest in monitoring would still be reduced at the expense of smaller investors.
To sum up Maug’s findings it can be noted that in a civil-law country like Finland, average shareholders will suffer from legalized insider trading. In a sense efficiency on the market increases as information sooner is reflected in the share price, but simultaneously the lack of monitoring would reduce the overall operational efficiency of corporations. As a result then, not only uninformed shareholders suffer, but even employees of the corporation and other stakeholders are put in a disadvantageous position whereby the society as a whole suffers.
Insider Trading – The Finnish legislative system
Insider trading has in Finland been regulated since 1989 by both the Finnish law and the rules and regulations of the OMXH stock exchange. (finlex.fi) In this section of the paper, the nature of these regulations is discussed in detail, additionally focusing on differences in legislative systems such as civil- vs. common law. 
Who is an insider?
Any person holding unpublished information that can be assumed to have a significant effect on a company’s share price is considered an insider, to which the insider trading regulations apply. Additionally, persons in the following positions are permanent insiders:
-The managing director and his/her deputy
	-Members of the supervisory board
	-Persons in the management with regular access to inside information
	-The company’s auditor, deputy auditor, and audit company manager
In addition, persons within the organization that through their work receive sensitive information are insiders. This even includes hired personnel working on temporary projects, e.g. consultants or attorneys. (OMXH guidelines for insiders)
Known cases of illegal insider trading in Finland
In this section of the paper court rulings on abused inside information are presented. 

These include:

Jouko K Leskinen 2003
Timo Jouhki 2006
TJ Group 2009
LSO Osuuskunta 2010
Discussion
Based on previous research and the value destruction done to minority investors by corporate insiders, it is hard to find real motivations for legalizing insider trading. Moreover, investors are not the only stakeholders that were to suffer as capital markets lose liquidity; employees would become worse off, eventually harming the whole society.  

