The Planning Phase of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems

Introduction

Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems are integrated (most often) computer-based systems used to manage internal and external resources. They promise seamless integration of all the information flowing through a company and has been target for extensive study in recent years. It is generally accepted that ERP systems can be an invaluable tools for a company and everything a manager has ever wished for. Hammer (1990) presented how computers and computer systems can dramatically reform business processes with cost-cutting far greater than initially believed.

However, these studies are mostly looking for critical success factors and have not enough focused on the planning process. As Hammer (1990) presents his findings on greater benefits than believed, it is interesting to look at the planning process of an implementation of a new ERP system. The question remains: How do companies plan the implementation of a new ERP system and how do they calculate the benefits they hope for? It is therefore of interest to look at what companies focus on.

The purpose of this paper is to analyze the planning phase of adopters of ERP systems through indentifying critical success factors during the planning phase. This will be done by looking at research done on the topic, organize it and find what kind of research seems to dominate the literature. By gathering research as recent possible an up-to-date review on what is today believed to be the steps needed during planning can be introduced. This paper hopes to show that there are certain steps and focus companies should take into consideration.

This paper is divided into two parts. The first section describes the framework used in the analysis, a theoretical framework. It includes a definition on ERP systems and on the planning phase. The second part consists of a literature review on the planning process. The literature review is divided into (we’ll see)…

Theoretical framework
Enterprise resource planning systems

ERP-systems can be everything a manager has ever wished for. Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) Systems are integrated (most often) computer-based systems used to manage internal and external resources. These systems promise seamless integration of all the information flowing through a company. Financial and accounting information, human resource information, supply chain information, customer information – all easily managed, controlled and ready for analyzing. Simply, an ERP System’s purpose is to facilitate the flow of information between all business functions inside the boundaries of the organization and manage the connections to outside stakeholders. Often built on a centralized database ERP systems consolidate all business operations into a uniform and enterprise-wide system environment. A tool with the ability to do this has the possibility to make or break a business. 
Implementing ERP software is typically too complex for "in-house" skill, so outside consultants who are professionally trained to implement these systems are needed.  Obviously, a successful implementation is vital in order to get any benefits from the new system. As new ERP-systems and especially the implementation of them are often very expensive, therefore the success factors behind implementation are interesting. Time is also interesting. The implementation can take many years, while business performance is measured more often, and managers are often in a hurry to see results on the investment. Implementation success factors have undergone a lot of research, while less has focused on what need to be done before implementation, during the planning phase. This gap is also the topic of this paper.

The planning phase 
In this paper, the planning phase includes system configuration and the launch (Nah, Lau & Kuang 2001). In academic literature, the planning phase is often also called ”the project phase” (e.g. Markus et al 2000). The most important figures are according to Nah, Lau & Kuang (2001); “the project manager”, “project team members”, “internal IT specialists”, “vendors”, and “consultants”. Further Siriginidi (2000) emphasizes organizational preparedness for embarking on Enterprise Rescource Planning systems which means that in order for the company to fully take advantage of the ERP functions to create a profit margin towards competitors, it is important to reflect over the planning phase.

Literature review
This section consists of a literature review of prior research on the planning phase of new ERP-systems. First identified are the success factors in the planning phase after which potential problems that can arise during the planning phase are explained. 

Success factors in the planning phase
Markus, Axline, Petrie & Tanis (2000) conducted a study where they addressed two main research questions. The first research question focused on the success of the companies at different stages of their ERP experiences and the relationship between different success measures. The first research question aimed to answer if early successes eventually could resort in later failure and the other way around. The second research question focuses on the problems that companies adopting ERP systems can encounter and how the problems are connected to the outcome. In the study Markus et al. (2000) divide the different stages of the ERP experiences into three categories; (1) “the project phase” (planning phase), (2) “the shakedown phase” (where the companies normalizes the operations) (3) “the onward and upward phase” (in which the companies absorb the ERP business benefits and plan further technology implementation).
For the project phase, which is relevant for this paper, Markus et al. (2000) define success metrics as (1) “Project cost relative to budget”, (2) “Project completion time relative to schedule” and (3) “Completed and installed system functionality relative to original project scope”. The Markus et al. (2000) study used different methods for their study which included; (1) reviews of studies (published and in-process) and ERP implementation cases, (2) case studies of five organizations with ERP experience, (3) 11 interviews, which were conducted by phone or face to face, with organizations with ERP experience, (4) close to 20 interviews with consultants and members of the ERP vendor company that sponsored their study. Further the companies for the Markus et al. (2000) study were selected through several criteria. First, Markus et al. (2000) selected companies that wanted to learn about how to enhance their ERP experiences through the study and they were requited at public presentations. Second, they selected companies in diverse phases of their ERP experiences. Third, they selected companies that had experienced problems with ERP and not companies that only had experienced lack of success. 
In another study, Injazz (2001) recognizes that many of the ERP failures today can be attributed to inadequate planning prior to installation. His article identifies several critical planning issues such as needs assessment, the choice of the right ERP system, matching business process with the ERP system, understanding the organizations requirements and economic and strategic justification. The article also sees new windows of opportunity as well as challenges facing companies today as enterprise systems continue to evolve and expand.
The first success factor in Injazz’s (2001)study, assessing needs and choosing the “right” ERP system. There might be many factors behind a company’s desire for a new ERP System. The many success stories widely cited, the fear of falling behind, or simply a report which states that current business processes and procedures are insufficient for their current and future needs can be the reason enough. When this first thought occurs, the first step is before eagerly moving forward is an internal needs assessment. As ERP systems can be hugely expensive, as much as 3$ million for a small company and 1$ billion for a large company (Injazz 2001), the needs assessment should be done thoroughly. There is much to be decided upon. Is a standard off-the-shelf system enough or is a custom-made solution needed? What modules should be included? There are many more questions but the answer to most of them lies in visualizing life after implementation. If the assessor can see how the company will work and utilize the ERP system in the future when it is fully implemented, then the right system can be chosen. Then, the right value of the new system can also be calculated.
The second success factor during planning which Injazz (2001) points out is “matching business process with the ERP systems”. Realization of what the program is designed to solve becomes tricky when it comes to ERP systems. With information systems in the past, the system was fully designed to fit the company’s business processes. With many ERP systems today, the business process must be modified to fit the ERP system (Davenport 1998). Much off-the-shelf software, such as the SAP, are so big, widely accepted and standardized so the company must actually change how they do business. As the ERP systems and companies providing them often are a lot bigger than the companies buying them, the buyer is often forced to fit their processes around the system. This leads to that the best competitive advantage these small companies can achieve with the (expensive) systems are an as tight as possible fit between their business processes and the ERP system. (Injazz 2001). This factor shows that much focus must be on what the ERP system is supposed to do, and that business processes match with the system. This is something which need to be considered already during planning.

 “Understanding the organizational requirements”, is also a success factor for the planning phase (Injazz 2000). Many ERP systems are not fully utilized as companies fail to realize the full benefits it can provide. The organizations are not organized in such a way that full utilization is possible and the new information tolls it provides goes unused. Injazz (2001) phrases it as “their organizations are not positioned for integration”. Instead, department work against their own set of goals. One of the biggest benefits of a cross-organizational ERP system is that departments could work together and not need to split up their part of the chain. ERP systems want to make a company easier to grasp. These organizational requirements are important in the planning phase as they tell how and with what kind of mindset the implementation should be achieved.  They bring us to another important success factor, top managements support. It is top management who has the best enterprise view of the company and therefore can tackle these issues with organizational requirements. (Injazz 2001) Top management is more than just a blessing. Important people in the center of the business must be freed for the implementation process, sufficient funding is needed and commitment to a ongoing company-wide education are a few points Injazz (2001) tell top management to focus on. When a ERPs system enters the company, many jobs change significantly and this must also be accepted. The same points, referred to as “enterprise wide culture and structure change” also are also pointed out by Falkowski et al. (1998). Further research include Rosario (2000) who goes further by including change of corporate culture when new ERP systems are planned.

 Injazz (2000) last success factor is the economic and strategic justification of the system. An ERP system effort means a great investment for a firm. The benefits are hard to calculate and seldom occur before the next financial statements. It might be, that the ERP system, although its fanciness can prove more expensive than the value it creates. The economic justification analysis can also help finding bottlenecks during implementation and maybe more important, more possible savings than were initially thought of. These newly found benefits and saving can later become yardstick for performance evaluation (Injazz 2001). The economic and strategic justification was more comprehensively studied by Small and Chen (1997) and Injazz & Small (1996).

 The planning phase of the ERP can lead to many problems for the adopters, which we have discussed earlier. Markus et al. (2000) mean that a lot of the problems that the ERP systems faced in the planning process were also detected at later stages, which would suggest that emphasizing correction of the problems at the time of their detection should be given high priority. Markus et al. (2000) identified some problems from the planning phase that occur at later stages, which perhaps would not have occurred if action would have been taken to during the planning phase. 

Focusing on improving the end-user training in the planning phase.

During the planning phase the plans should involve long term thinking including maintenance and personnel migration.

Focus on documenting  why configuration are made in order to help also those not involved in the planning process to faster understand why certain configuration s have been made.

Not to get rid of the team involved with the project when it is taken into use, but rather to focus on establishing a competence center to take care of the evolution and learning 

Adding Injazz (2000) points we get a list of critical success factors during the planning phase of ERP system implementation:
Needs assessment and the choice of the right ERP system
Matching business process with the ERP system
Understanding the organizations requirements
Economic and strategic justification

Conclusions 

The purpose of this study was to analyze the planning phase of adopters of ERP systems through indentifying critical success factors during the planning phase as well as potential problems.  
The literature used in this study revealed that many of the ERP failures today can be attributed to inadequate planning prior to installation (eg. Injazz, 2001). This is also supported by the Markus et al. (2000) study who found that problems from the planning phase can occur at later stages. These findings could suggest that avoiding and correcting errors at the planning phase could help to prevent potential later problems.  
The results of this litterateur review suggest that there are several critical planning issues such as; needs assessment, the choice of the right ERP system, matching business process with the ERP system, understanding the organizations requirements and economic and strategic justification.
