Corporate governance and takeovers: Is corporate governance value ­ destructive in the bidder company?



1. Introduction
Despite the short-term decrease in mergers & acquisitions, this market is on a long-term growth
trend. When organic growth is foreseen, M&A activity is the most relevant growth path for growing
companies. This, among other things, builds interest towards M&A studies.

Empirical evidence show, that even though takeovers are value-creating, the stock-performance for
takeover bidders, and in many case takeover target, is negative. One reason for this might be that
the stock-performance of the involved companies are affected by external factors. Barik (2012)
show that for instance takeover defenses impacts the value-creation in the takeover event. What is
destroying the value in M&A?

Meanwhile, there has been a wide interest towards the corporate governance mechanism in
companies, due to the value creating effect of it. Corporate governance can be seen as a hot topic in
today´s academic research. Previous research focuses on the impact of external factor on the value-
creating process of takeovers, but few studies focuses on the corporate governance aspect of the
deal.

There are many different fields of studies within takeover studies; many studies focus on the stock-
performance of the bidder and/or the target company ( (Servaes, 2012) (McConnell, 2012)), while
others on the tax implications of acquisition (Ryngaert, 2012) and the rest on optimal financing
structure of the takeover (Morellec & Zhdanov, 2008) As a result, no comprehensive theory appears
to exist on how corporate governance affects the value-creation at the event of takeovers. The
question remains, has previous studies focused too much on the external factor implications in
takeover events, and foreseen the internal factor implications at these events?

This study focuses on the bidder in takeovers, and classifying them in successful and unsuccessful,
based on the bidders' stock-performance. There after the paper will try to study if differences in
corporate governance principals have had a significant impact on the stock-performance. I.e. this
paper hopes to show that there, in fact, is a correlation between the stock-performance of the bidder
after the initial announcement of a takeover and some specific corporate governance principles in
the same company.

The reminder of this paper is divided into six sections. First, the paper introduces key concepts and
theories of corporate governance and takeover theory. Secondly, a literature review is conducted to
create an academic background for this study. After this, a description of the data in the study is
presented. Then the method and the results are presented. The paper ends with a discussion around
the main findings and how these relate to previous research.
2. Theoretical framework

2.1. Corporate governance
Corporate governance is one of the cornerstones of corporate finance and the theory have been
studied thoroughly (Cadbury, 1992; Claessens;Djankov;& Lang; Clarke, 2007; Khalid, 2011). The
main reason why companies need to think about corporate governance is agency theory. Basically,
the theory assumes that managers with substantial freedom act more likely in ways that improves
their own interest instead of the shareholders interest. Therefore, without appropriate corporate
governance mechanism the company is lead inefficiently and firm value is destroyed. (Sheraz, 2009)

2.1.1. Agency Theory
Agency theory, introduced by Jensen and Meckling in 1976 in their article "Theory of the Firm:
managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure", sees a firms as a legal entity that
serves as a connection point between different individuals. A contract combines these individuals,
under which individual (principal) engages another individual (agent) take decisions on behalf of
him. Therefore, the principal must align the agents' incentives to those of himself, so that resources
are not wasted on unattractive projects. This issue is called "the agency problem". Agency theory
can also be defined as the problem arising when management and finance is separated, or ownership
and control as it can also be referred. The problem is created when ownership and control is not
aligned and there is conflict of interest. These conflicts of interest, together with imperfect contracts
and inefficient monitoring of controllers, eventually cause a decrease in firm value. Furthermore,
lots of small stakeholders with limited negotiation or monitoring resources increases conflict of
interest.


Agency theory can further be divided in two parts; moral hazard and adverse selection. (Sheraz,
2009) In moral hazard the company management uses its position to secure personal benefit in cost
of the principals. Moral hazard is prevented by eliminating information symmetry and increasing
external monitoring mechanism. (Arrow, 1965) Adverse selection is a problem when people utilize
their person information to achieve personal benefits. Risk sharing, which minimized benefits from
cheating, and information sharing, which reveals information now public, decreases the risk of
adverse selection. (Akerlof, 1970)


In this study, agency problem arises at the merger or acquisition situation. Management influences
highly on the probability of success for a merger or acquisition.

2.1.2. Corporate governance mechanisms
Corporate governance mechanisms limit the value destruction of agency problem. The mechanism
can further divide in two main groups; internal control mechanism and external control mechanism.
(Sheraz, 2009)

2.1.2.1. Internal control mechanism
Internal control mechanism can further be divided in several sub-categories; Monitoring by the
board, Internal control procedures and internal auditors, entrenchment and incentive alignment, and
ownership structure. (Sheraz, 2009) Because the focus of this paper is on the external control
mechanism, the paper only focuses on two sub-categories in the following to give an overview of
the internal control mechanism. These are the monitoring by the board and ownership structure.

The internal control mechanism the board of directors beholds has been studied widely (Baysinger
& Butler, 1985; Beasley, 1996; Hopt & Leyens, 2004; Bhagat & Black, 1999). The board of
directors' main task is to supervise the top management. The board of directors create and incentive
to the top management to perform well, because otherwise they are able to fire the current
management and hire new management instead. The board of directors has access to all company
related information and can therefor act efficiently. (Bhagat & Black, 1999)

Ownership structure is another internal control mechanism and has been studied thoroughly (Xu &
Wang, 1999; Shivdasani, 1993; Singh & Davidson, 2003). Shareholder that own a 5 % or more in
the company are major shareholders. For instance, In Finland, public companies are forced to
inform the public if their shareholding exceeds this percent (Finanssivalvonta, 2007). An individual
shareholder that owns large percent of company is able to misuse its ownership power to benefit on
the cost of others. Furthermore, the ownership structure impact on the monitoring of the company ­
a wide range of owners, not too many and not too few, is the desirable structure. This structure
enhances the monitoring of corporate action and increase firm value. (Shleifer & Vishny, 1997)

2.1.2.2. External control mechanism
The external control mechanism can be divided in three different categories; the takeover market,
product market competition and legal and regulatory framework. (Sheraz, 2009) In this study, the
main focus is on the takeover mechanism and therefor this part gets special attention. Product
market competition is not discussed.

The legal and regulatory framework of a country builds the basic pillars of corporate governance.
Without a working legal and regulatory system corporations cannot operate efficiently. Corporate
governance is determined basically by the level the country monitor investor rights and enforces
those laws. ( (La Porta;Lopez-De-Silanes;& Schelifer, 2002). La Porta et al. also show that a better
legal protection leads investors to demand lower expected rate of returns, resulting in more efficient
capital markets.

2.1.2.2.1. Hostile takeovers
A vast amount of theory and evidence support the idea of takeovers as control mechanism
( (Holmström & Kaplan, 2001; Shleifer & Vishny, 1997; Manne, 1965; Cyert & Kang, 2002).
Jensen and Ruback (1984) points out the most important point in takeovers: "takeovers typically
increase the combined value of the target and acquiring firm, indicating that profits are expected to
increase afterwards". Jensen (1986) further claims that takeovers solve the free cash flow problem
in target companies, because takeovers usually lead to distribution of the firm's profits to investors
over time. Usually, the target is performing poorly and the management is often removed after the
takeover. (Shleifer & Vishny, 1997) All-in-all, takeovers are seen as a crucial corporate governance
mechanism to control managerial discretion. (Easterbrook & Fischel, 1991)

Generally, takeovers are seen as an efficient external control mechanism, but some specific
questions should be remembered when takeovers are considered as control mechanisms. First,
acquisitions are expensive and therefore only mayor failures are likely to be addressed. Secondly,
acquisition might unbalance the ownership structure and increase agency costs. Thirdly,
acquisitions require liquid capital markets that are not given. Without liquid capital markets the
acquirer is unable to gather necessary capital.       Finally, acquisitions are influenced by political
mechanism, which can hinder an acquisition process.

Connection with our research

2.2. Mergers and acquisitions
It´s evident from the wide range of current research (Schmid;Carol;& Sanchez, 2012;
Caiazza;Clare;& Alberto, 2012; Sumon & Ekta, 2012) that mergers and acquisition is a hot topic in
corporate finance these days.

2.2.1. Motives behind acquisition
Muller & Sirower (2003) researched extensively different reasons for acquisitions. Their main
findings can be divided in four categories; market for corporate control hypothesis, managerial
discretion hypothesis, synergy hypothesis and hubris hypothesis. In following the paper address the
corporate control-, synergy- and hubris hypothesis.
Manne (1965) invented the term "market for corporate control" that created the hypothesis that
markets operated efficiently to eliminate managers who wanted to achieve goals that conflicted
shareholder interest or were incompetent to the task. The basic assumption for the hypothesis is that
any firm can capture the potential gain by reversing the inefficient policies of the target company.

Another reason for acquisition is synergies. Berkovitch & Narayanan (1993) identify synergies to
be the reasoning behind acquisition when two companies combined generate efficiencies due to
some sort of market power increase or cost reduction. Under this assumption both companies
realizes some of the benefits associated in the acquisition.

Finally, the hubris hypothesis bases on irrational behavior. A "winner's course" arises in auction
because the person with the largest error in its assumptions will win the auction. I.e. the bidder
company might be incompetent in evaluating acquisition benefits and therefor engaging in
unattractive M&A activity. (Roll, 1986)

Connection with our research
3. Previous research

3.1 Brewer & al. (2007)
In their article "Target's Corporate Governance and Bank Merger Payoffs" the authors investigate if
certain corporate governance characteristics of the target firm have an impact on the takeover
premium paid by the acquirer. They use three corporate governance determinants in their analysis,
namely the share of independent directors on the board of directors, managerial share ownership,
and the presence of independent large block holders.

The data used to estimate if corporate governance factors affect target premiums was collected from
a sample of bank merger and acquisition transactions between 1990 and 2004. The material
consisted initially of 11,252 transactions, but the authors narrowed it down to 392 mergers.

To compute the premium they used the model specification in Benston, Hunter, and Wall (1995).
According to this model the premium is the difference between the announced offer price for a
target organization and the market price of the target's common stock 20 business days prior to the
merger announcement date, multiplied by the number of common shares outstanding. To test if
corporate governance determinants have an impact on the premium the authors conduct a multiple
regression. As independent variable they use the premium and as dependent variables they use
(among others) board composition, Target's Managerial Share Ownership, Independent Large
Block holders, market to book value, and variance and covariance of the acquirers' and targets'
return on assets.

The study finds a significant positive relationship between independence of the target's board and
the size of merger purchase premiums received by the target. Further they find that the target
company's managerial share ownership and magnitude of independent block holders have a
negative impact on the merger purchase premiums received by the target bank.

3.2. Bebchuk, Cohen & Ferrel (2008)
In their article "What matters in corporate governance?" the article introduce an entrenchment index
which is used to determinate the excellence of corporate governance.
4. Data
The data source used to develop the acquisition sample was Thomson One Banker. Thereafter
Thomson Data stream is used to gather the financial information needed for regression analysis.
The preliminary target sample included only acquisitions of European companies on the financial,
manufacturing and construction industry during the period 2000 - 2006. The industries were chosen
to make an industry comparison possible and the period is limited to 2006 because corporate
governance index used in our regression is limited to this date. To facilitate the information
gathering process, only public companies with a market capitalization of above  100 million was
included.

Table 1 reports the summary statistics for the data set.

[Table]

Missing
5. Method
To determinate the impact of company corporate governance in target company on the premium of
bidder we first cluster the takeover targets accordingly to their corporate governance level and then
analyze the different clusters with a multiple regression analysis.

5.1. Clustering takeover targets
The takeover targets are clustered 4 tiers, clustered with the Bebhuck index, 1-4. Takeovers 200-
2006 ­ index 2006

5.2. Multiple regressions analysis
The variables applied to explain the risk premium (rp ) associated in the acquisition are: (1) CGIND:
the Bebchuk entrenchment index; (2) OWNS: the ownership structure of the target company; (3)
DIREC: The composition of board of directors; (4) SIZE: revenue to control for size; (5) INDUS:
industry to control for industry; (6) MULTI: EV/EBITDA multiple to control for profitability.

The multiple regression analysis applied in the study is as following:

Figure 1 multiple regression analysis

[Formula]




5.2.1. Bebchuk entrenchment index
In analyzing the corporate governance we apply bebchuk entrenchment index as benchmark for
corporate governance excellence. In their article "What matters in Corporate Governance?"
Bebhuck et al. introduced an entrenchment index based on six provisions: staggered boards, limits
to shareholder bylaw amendments, poison pills, golden parachutes, and supermajority requirements
for mergers and charter amendments. (Bebchuk;Cohen;& Ferrell, 2008)

5.2.2. Corporate governance and control variables
Bebchuk entrenchment index is a good corporate governance measurement, but to make the
measurement even more appropriate the study adds two additional variables; ownership structure
and board of directors.

In the multiple regressions analysis the premium is explained with the variables mentioned above.
Though, as Slusky & Caves (1991) shows, the excess premium is caused by profitability level,
target size and industry. This study addresses these causes by using three control variables; Size,
industry and EV/EBITDA multiple.

6. Results
The empirical part of the study is not yet completed.

6.2. Clustering takeover targets
Applying the clustering techniques represented in methodology part

6.3. Analyzing takeover targets
Analyzing the target companies with techniques represented in methodology part

6.4. Model diagnostics
Study the econometrics behind the methodology to check that statistical properties are acceptable.

7. Discussion
The main findings from the study is presented and then compared with previous studies.

8. Conclusion


