EMPLOYER BRANDING IN A DOWNSIZING ENVIRONMENT – AN HR PERSPECTIVE
A CASE study of FINNISH INVESTMENT BANK

1 Introduction

The recent economical recession forced numerous organisations round the world to fight for their existence and react to the changed market conditions in a short time frame. The most common way to cure the situation was by organisational decline. Usually organisational decline is performed in every level of an organisation and the aim is to cut costs, even by cutting wages or by laying-off employees (De Meuse et al. 2004). Interesting in this case was the fact that some organisations choose not to loose a single employee; this raised the question why these companies proceeded in this way a different way and could they afford it? Some researchers stated that these companies had invested in total quality management (which forces the companies in continues control of required workforce with core competence, but works only if implemented several years before the economical crises) (Kinnie et al 1997). Another explanation was that these companies were afraid of loosing key competences. Hasty decisions, forced by market decline, can cause firms to loose not only the competitive edge but also the most valuable human capital (Chadwick et al. 2004).  The problem when downsizing workforce is that organisations may let go of the wrong people (Osborne Kilpatrick 1999:212). The ultimate question then is:  how do firms manage their human resources, human capital and key talents in an environment were nothing is secure and rapid changes are required?  Companies that are not prepared in advance for fast changes needs to think about their organisational image as an employer both internally and externally and how they intend to retain their most valuable asset, the human capital (Tomasko 1991). From human resource management (HRM) perspective, companies needs to concentrate on retaining and recruiting workforce that has the ”vital” knowledge inline with for the company’s core business activity (Torrington et al.2005) 

1.2 Research problem

The previous research around employer branding has mainly concentrated on employer attractiveness and recruitment effectiveness (Backhaus et al 2004). Despite the importance of the previous studies around employer branding, few studies have specifically focused on the correlation of negative organisational publicity and employer branding. Therefore the question remains can a strong employer brand help to retain and recruit key talents after the ‘bad news’ is reviled? Particularly does investments in employer branding bring companies security in uncertain times? Especially when organisations have chosen to perform a downsizing program. Can employer branding be used for other purposes than simply to attract external and internal vacancies when the position is opened?

1.3 Previous research 

Recently, there has been wide interest toward the idea that employers can brand them selves to strengthen their position in labour markets. Employer branding is a quite new concept within the human resource management literature but is seen as an important tool for companies’ long-term strategy to gain competitive edge and to attract the right kind of employees to fill vacancies (Backhaus et al. 2004). Its been studied as a tool for employer attractiveness in the area of marketing and recently in human resource management (Berthon et al 2008). Branding has its roots originally in marketing were the aim is to make products and services more attractive. Therefore the research around employer branding has been previously researched in the marketing literature and just recently entered the HR-literature. 

There are some explanations why employer branding has risen to business articles within a few years time and especially attached to the HRM ‘territory’. According Backhaus and Tikoo (2004) there is some evidence that employer branding improves recruitment outcomes and minimizes the recruitment selection costs. Other reason to the intensified interest toward employer branding is according to Rosenblatt (2001) the so-called ‘brain drain’ effect. Initially the term was used to describe a phenomenon were the most intelligent and educated workforce leaves their home countries for higher wages overseas. In business studies, the brain drain phenomenon is used to illustrate shortages in certain kind of knowledge-workers in the employment market. 

1.3.1 Previous research: employer branding

According to Tikoo et. al (2004) the term employer branding can shortly been defined as: “the application of branding principles to human resource management” (Tikoo et al 2004:501). This definition in addition to several other similar definitions, see figure 1, indicates the importance to understand the underlying foundation of marketing concepts, “branding principles”. Furthermore, it seems that the two schools i.e. the human resource school and the marketing school, are still competing over the territory. Since the term “employer branding” was initially found in 1990’s within the field of Marketing by Barrow (source). For instance Michell (2002) argues that the field of employer branding should be left to marketing people since: HR professionals, typically-don’t have the marketing skills to communicate successfully” (Michell 2002:99). The author explains the statement by the lack of intercommunicative skills that usually are addressed to the human resource people. 

Before going any further it is important to investigate the fundamentals of each perspective. From a marketing point of view employer branding is used to describe.  Human resource perspective has a total different goal.   

[Figure] 

1.3.2 Previous Research: Downsizing Environment & Employer Branding

Since the nature of this study is to find correlations between human resource practices such as employer branding, has on workforce recruitment and retention during organisational decline it is central to explore previous research around a certain environmental condition such as economical downturn. When the settings are changed also the sources changes towards economics, finance and human resource management.   In this paper downsizing is defined as: “a choice made to reduce the workforce, which is intended to improve organizational performance” (Rollinson 2005:480). 

When screening the research around organisational decline it can be stated that researcher from the human resource school has been concentrating more on employee relations and payment issues. The finance and economic schools on the other hand, has addressed the questions about the effects of short- and long term investments and the effects of cost reduction. Interestingly, the question about organisational image during a downsizing period seemed to be out of mutual concern. However, it appeared that the question of organisational image was a ‘side product’ to each school of economics. Consequently, employer branding in a downsizing environment has so far researched less.

1.4 Purpose of the study

This paper aims to investigate one of the most recent ways organisations intend to retain and recruit ‘key talent’ during organisational downsizing. Emphasis of this paper will be on the HRM practices focusing on employer branding

1.5 Limitations

This study aims to explain, analyse and research through the human resource perspective. This paper tends to explain the phenomena using large and medium sized organisations. Employees are studied as objects therefore any personal or individual aspects to downsizing are not taken into a count. 

1.6 Methodological and empirical considerations 

The method used in this paper will an explorative case study. The theoretical framework will consist of previous research around the topic. Since I do not aim to test an existent theory I hope to finalize the thesis by creating a link between downsizing and employer branding. 

1.7 Structure of this paper

The author hopes to find understanding through defining first the most central concepts and definitions: employer branding, organisational downsizing, HRM practices, recruitment and organizational image. This is followed by the core theory about employer branding conceptualized by Backhaus and Tikoo (2004). In search for more insights to the research topic, a case study of a Finnish investment bank will be presented. Finally the paper discusses findings and suggestions for further research. 

2 CONSEPTUAL OVERVIEW OF KEY TERMS
2.1 HRM
2.2 HR Practices
2.2.1 Recruitment
2.3 Organizational image

3 Employer Branding in a downsizing environment
In this section the theoretical foundation for the research and analysis is presented. The discussion will shift from a downsizing environment towards employer branding. The essential terms such as HRM and HR-practices are presented earlier in the introduction chapter. 
3.1 Organization in a downsizing environment
3.2 The effects of downsizing 
3.1.1 Organisation external and internal issues 
3.2.2 Employer
3.2.3 Employee
3.3 The essence of employer branding – an HRM perspective
3.3.1 The Backhaus and Tikoo framework for employer branding  
3.4 Summary of theory
4 METHOD 
5 EXPLORATIV CASE STUDY
6 DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION 
 
