Virtual Teams:  - a career trap?

INTRODUCTION

Recently organizations have showed a wide interest in virtual teams. Virtual teams create flexibility and efficiency cross organization, which allows organizations to react faster to the changing market environment and customer needs (Nokia, 2008). According to Powell et al., (2004) the most successful companies today create competitive advantage by responding to customer “needs” (new products and services) more rapidly then competitors. What makes virtual teams so effective and flexible is the fact that knowledge can be transferred across organization without geographical restrictions. Virtual teams have also been seen cost effective compared to traditional teams. According to Sanford Business University (2003) organizations can save up to million dollars in compliance cost yearly. 
1.1 Research problem

However, recent data have shown that many organizations create virtual teams without necessary policies or knowledge how to manage or train these diversified teams. Poor management of virtual teams shows up in human resource indicators, such as low confidence and retention of employees. Virtual team members experience having less possibilities to develop in their careers then traditional team members, which has been seen as one of the main causes to employee retention. Retaining virtual knowledge workers is vital to companies because finding a new team member is not easy. According to Time Management (2010), not everyone is suitable for working in virtual teams. Working in virtual teams requires self-motivation on strong result orientation because employees work without clear structure and control. Virtual teams members are required to communicate in fast speed and still keep the communication positive and constructive without face-to-face communication. 

1.2 Purpose of Study

The purpose of this study is to find ways for human resource management to design successful development programs for virtual teams. 

1.3 Method
1.4 Structure

This paper is structured as follows. The first section presents the research problem and the purpose of the study. The second section presents the pre-knowledge and key concepts, which clarifies not only the key definitions but also the important functions necessary in virtual team management. Previous research will be presented in the second section to draw a line between human recourse practices and current studies. Therefore it seems logical to present the research limitation under the second section. The third section presents the theoretical framework on virtual team development practices and the final section presents conclusions and recommendations to further studies. 

2 Conceptual overview of key concepts and pre- knowledge

2.1 Virtual teams

Virtual teams also know as geographically dispersed teams (GDT), was established to maximize company productivity and to reduce meeting and traveling cost between company subsidiaries and customers. The primary idea of these teams is to be able to work together despite of the different geographical location and different time zones. 

2.2 Traditional teams versus Virtual teams
2.3 Human resource management practices for virtual teams
2.4 Previous research on virtual teams
2.5 Limitations
2.6 Summary of key concepts and pre-knowledge
3 Theoretical Framework for development of virtual teams
3.1 Competencies
3.2 Learning and development of virtual teams
3.3 Career development of virtual teams
3.4 Summary of Theory
4 Discussions
4.1 Discussion of the theory and findings
4.2 Further Reading
4.3 Summary of Discussion  