The relationship between economic growth and poverty reduction

Introduction 

Economic growth and poverty are often seen to be linked to each other, as an increasing GDP per capita ratio implies that people in a growing economy will be better off. However, it is generally acknowledged that the gains from economic growth do not necessarily trickle down to the poorest share of the population in a straightforward manner. Even though an increasing GDP per capita ratio implies an increase in the average income level, it might not reach the whole population, and hence even a large increase in the average measure might not decrease the number of people living in absolute poverty in the country. In the latter half of the 19th century, there has been wide interest in understanding aspects of poverty reduction. This is because knowledge of the link between economic growth and poverty helps when planning development strategies and understanding their implications on the population, but also when assessing the prospects and limitations for investment projects into developing countries. The question of inequality is also of great importance when analysing these problems. The link between growth and poverty has been studied especially by researchers such as Ravallion, Kuznets, as well as Anand and Kanbur. However, despite research, there is no comprehensive theory in the matter. The aim of this essay is therefore to answer the question of whether or not economic growth results in poverty reduction in developing countries.

First relevant concepts, i.e. poverty, economic growth and pro-poor growth are defined. This is followed by a discussion of the relationship between growth and poverty reduction, which is based especially on the question of inequality, as well as initial conditions and the importance of development. All of these factors play a key role in evaluating whether time periods or implemented policies show signs of the existence of pro-poor growth. Two examples are also given in this research, namely the historical evidence of the relationship between economic development and poverty reduction in Brazil and Uganda respectively.

Describe content in each section?


Literature review
Method/material 

This text will be based on an assessment of the relevant theories that underline the link between economic growth and poverty reduction. 
Definitions/results? 

Economic growth

Economic growth is, as defined by the World Bank, the change or expansion of a country's economy in the period of a year. It is the percentage increase or decrease of the country's gross domestic product (GDP) or the gross national product (GNP). Economic growth can be achieved either by using a greater amount of resources, e.g. land, labour or capital, or by becoming more efficient in using these resources. Only the latter leads to higher income per capita, and economic efficiency is therefore often a requirement for poverty reduction and the improvement in the average standard of living. 

As the increase in GDP is an average of the country as a whole, it does not reveal how the different parts of a country are developing. It is, however, a relatively good measure when it comes to cross country comparison, and seeing how a country's economy change from one year to the other. 


Pro-poor growth

There is no exact definition of pro-poor growth, or rather it varies depending on who one asks, but it is generally thought of as economic growth that is more favourable to the poor than to the rich, thus narrowing the differences in the distribution of income. Pro-poor growth could be seen as a benchmark measure from a country's own historical perspective. This means that any periods of growth could be compared to a specific historical period of time where growth was not seen as pro-poor, and thereby analyse whether the new period of growth has, or will, benefit the poor more than the rich. However, for the sake of simplicity and allowing for comparison, pro-poor growth is often seen as just a period of growth that favours the poor more than the rich. 
Poverty 

Poverty can be measured in different ways, but according to the World Bank, the poverty line is the level of income below which people are considered poor. The income level shows on average how much income is required in order to buy basic necessities such as food, clothes and shelter. Country specific, or national poverty lines, change over time and are different in all regions. The international poverty line is often defined at $1 per day (PPP), i.e. a person whose average income or consumption is less than one dollar per day is considered to be poor. International poverty lines have also been set at $2, $4 or $11, as the income required for a sufficient standard of living is often higher in middle- or high-income countries. These days a measure of $1.25 is, however, often used. The poverty line measures absolute poverty, in contrast to measures of relative poverty. Absolute poverty is seen as a globally comparable measure, in contrast to relative poverty measures that are often seen as the income level below a median income that is specific for a country and a period of time. Poverty is often calculated both as the number of poor people in a country as well as so called poverty headcount ratio, i.e. the percentage of poor people in a country in relation to the total population. This often leads to problems when measuring poverty changes over time, due to the often rapid population growth in developing countries. For example, the number of poor can increase due to rapid population growth, while the percentage of the poor people in a country stays constant. Chronic poverty is often defined as constant poverty, i.e. a person is living in absolute poverty for longer periods of time, in contrast to people who move in and out of poverty repeatedly.

Poverty can also be defined by other measures, e.g. by an asset-based model or in non-monetary terms. Non-monetary based poverty measures include for example calculating the improvements in healthcare, education, nutrition, various types of security and life expectancy. Poverty can also be viewed upon from a capability perspective, where an individuals poverty not only takes into consideration her wealth, but also her abilities and possibilities to make use of this wealth in the best possible way. This is an important broadening of the simple poverty line measure, as this takes into account many other imminent factors of poverty as well, such as ill health or lack of education, that undoubtedly are very closely linked to poverty. This requires of course intimate knowledge of an individuals possibilities and capabilities, which makes data collection and comparisons very difficult to make.

The monetary poverty measures are often critiqued for being arbitrary; if one earns, or consumes, less than $0.99 per day one is poor, whereas living on $1.01 per day makes one not poor. The difference of two cents can therefore be of huge importance in poverty calculations. Monetary poverty measures also exclude many important factors of poverty, as poverty is not only about consumption or income, but also more intangible things such as education or life expectancy that are not always directly linked to the amount of money an individual can spend. Household surveys, which are used for collecting data about poverty, are also slightly problematic. Measuring income or consumption can be difficult for many reasons, for example due to intra-household distribution. Income and/or consumption do not always tell all the relevant facts about a persons wealth, because assets are not included in these measurements. Therefore it could be useful to combine both monetary, asset-based and non-monetary aspects when measuring poverty.

The relationship between economic growth and poverty/discussion 

The relationship between growth and poverty works both ways; when GDP per capita increases as a result of economic growth, the proportion of poor people in a country tends to become smaller as a well. It has however, been observed, that the greater the absolute poverty number in a country is, the lower the growth ratio will be. 

The question of inequality of the distribution of income is very important when discussing pro-poor growth and the relationship between growth and poverty. There seems, however, not to be a definite relationship between growth and inequality in either direction. Anand and Kanbur proved in 1993, based on a theory presented first by Kuznets in 1955, that a link exists between economic growth, urbanisation (i.e. development) and the distribution of income per capita. It is suggested that economic growth leads to urbanisation, as people move into the cities for new jobs. The average income level is, however, lower in rural areas than in urban areas. Economic growth most often benefits urban areas first because of the need for development in key regions, which leads to an even wider gap in the distribution of income between rural and urban areas. Newer studies show that policies aimed at reducing inequality do not necessarily have an impact on economic growth. The results can be very much negative in the long run, especially if this done by distorting foreign trade or the market mechanism on the domestic markets. 

The graph below, Graph 1 GDP per capita and absolute poverty in Brazil 1978-2004, shows the annual growth rate of GDP  as a percentage and absolute poverty as a percentage of the total population in Brazil between 1978 and 2004. The case of Brazil is a good example of the result of inequality, growth and poverty. The graph shows a quite strong linkage between the increase in both GPD per capita and the absolute headcount poverty, which suggests that the distribution of income is very broad in Brazil and inequality can therefore be seen as a problem. 

Uganda, in contrast to Brazil, showed both a period of pro-poor growth as well as a period of growth that was not pro-poor between 1992 and 2003. GDP per capita grew by 4,3 % between 1993 and 2000, and by 2,9 % between 2000 and 2002. In the same time periods poverty first decreased from 56 % to 34 % and then increased back to 38 %. In this example the shift from pro-poor growth to growth that was not pro-poor, can be explained by changes in the international demand for the country's agricultural products. In the late 1990's, the demand, and therefore the prices as well, for Uganda's agricultural products increased. However, in 2001 coffee, tea, tobacco and cotton prices dropped internationally, and the Ugandan economy staggered, forcing most of the poor farmers into poverty. 

The processes observed in Uganda are very normal scenarios in the developing world. When the changes in GDP, both increases and decreases, are observed over a longer period of time, inequality will both rise and fall, regardless of the changes in GDP. As a result, poverty can either increase or decrease during economic growth, depending on how the level of inequality in the same time period. Rising inequality during economic growth does, however, not necessarily decrease the rate of poverty reduction, i.e. it cannot be concluded that a higher level of poverty reduction would be achieved if only the level of inequality was lower. This would require the dubious assumption that growth would remain constant despite a lower level of inequality, which cannot be done without reservation. 

The initial conditions are also of importance when analysing changes in poverty. If inequality is high to begin with, it is likely that growth will not be very much pro-poor, whereas a low initial level of inequality is more likely to gain proportionally more from the growth than the rich. The distribution-corrected rate of growth is therefore the one needs to take into account when calculating poverty reduction. The initial conditions are not only important regarding inequality, but also when assessing other aspects of pro-poor growth. For example low living standards and high proportion of the population working in the agricultural sector often lead to lower poverty reduction. Initial conditions often also mean that chronically poor people do not even have the possibility to take advantage of growth. If for example new jobs are not accessible due to lack of transportation infrastructure, education or ill health, the chronically poor will remain poor because they lack the opportunities to change their situation. Chronic poverty is therefore as such a major issue, as many chronically poor people lack the possibilities to influence their own situation. 

If poverty is measured based on non-monetary aspects, the link between pro-poor and not pro-poor growth is bound to be less obvious, because this would also require changes in government policy and the development strategies that are chosen to be implemented. If there is a functioning taxation system, the gains from a growing economy can partially be used for development purposes, for example increasing healthcare and education possibilities for everyone. Economic growth can therefore over time lead to a narrower distribution of income and decrease in poverty, as the public sector grows through development. This will most likely decrease absolute poverty regardless of which measurement, monetary or non-monetary, is used. However, if the gains of economic growth are not taxed, or the money is spent on things other than development of the public sector, the poor will not be better off and remain chronically poor. Inequality can grow in these cases as well. Accurate and effective development strategies are therefore of utmost importance in a country if the government wishes to reduce chronic poverty in a country. 
Conclusion

Researchers have found a link between economic growth and poverty reduction. This link is not always as obvious as it could seem; a country produces more and therefore incomes on a national level increase, and people should be better off as a result. However, as the GDP per capita ratio is only a national average, problems arise. Inequality, for example, is a major issue when discussing growth and poverty; how does inequality alter the distribution of income and especially, will the people living in absolute poverty gain at all from the growing economy? These questions can only be answered with intimate knowledge of the existing conditions in each specific case, even though a country's initial conditions can give a hint as to how the situation might develop. In Brazil, inequality lead to a worsening situation for the poor when the economy grew, and more people fell into poverty despite economic growth. Pro-poor growth, growth that benefits the poor proportionally more than the rich, can only occur when inequality is low and the distribution of income not too wide. Changes in inequality are as such not linked to growth, and during periods of economic growth, poverty can therefore either increase or decrease. Uganda has shown examples of both situations.


As poverty can be measured in different ways, based on income and/or consumption, assets, or non-monetary measures such as education and healthcare, even high initial inequality can theoretically lead to poverty reduction, if the government has possibilities to narrow the distribution of income through for example taxation and thereby increase government spending on healthcare and education. Decreasing non-monetary poverty does, however, demand a functioning and development-oriented government, that has the desire to increase possibilities for the chronically poor. Initial inequality in opportunities can easily lead to less pro-poor growth in developing countries, as chronically poor people often have inferior chances to for example get a job due to the lack of education or ill health, and they therefore have a smaller possibility to take part of economic growth, through which they could influence their situation and move out of chronic poverty. 


