	
What type of perceived value do young consumers find important in smartphones?

1. Introduction

One only needs to open the newspaper of the day to be able to get an overview of the on-going fight over market shares in the mobile phone industry(Kauppalehti 26.09.2012, Koskinen). For Finns, as I am, Nokia has been of high importance for the economy in the past. This is one of the reasons I think the Finnish media takes such a high interest in the questions concerning the mobile phone business. 
But the mobile phone market is for sure in an interesting phase, which can be seen in table 1 below, with Nokia having to hand the market share leader position to Samsung and with Apple also steadily covering more ground.In Epstein’s (2012) article it is indicated that specifically on the smartphone market, Nokia has lost a lot of ground and thus, worsened its situation.
[Table]
When we are talking about the mobile phone industry, we are in other words talking about a highly dynamic and changing market. Today, the development of smartphones is crucial for the success of the mobile phone companies and the competition is therefore hard. A big difference among the largest players on the market, Samsung, Nokia and Apple is that they are all using different operating systems. Samsung is using Android, developed by Google, Nokia has used Symbian but is changing to Windows operating system and finally Apple is using its own developed IOS system. Anoverview of the situation of the operating systems in shipped smartphones can be seen in table 2 below. When watching the table it becomes quite clear what the trends look like in the smartphone business. Android is clearly the leading operating system followed by Apples IOS. The most interesting question is what has happened to Nokia? It has the second largest overall market shares in the mobile phone industry but has lost a lot of ground to other players on smartphones. 
This is a bad sign for Nokia and the company itself took to drastic marketing campaigns by hanging a sign in front of their main shop in Helsinki, promising that “something amazing is coming…” September 7th (see iltalehti.fi:Nokialta tulossa jotain mullistavaa syyskuussa?). That day they revealed their new flagship product, the Lumia 920 and Lumia 820.When the first advertising movie clips became available huge protests against Nokia rose, because of flaws in one of the clips (see HS.fi: Nokia: Harkinta petti mainosvideon käytössäand appendix 1: link to Youtube where the clip can be seen).
[Table]

At Apple and Samsung on the other hand, the pressure on the market can be seen through lawsuits against each other (see HS.fi: Applelle taas voitto patenttikiistassa; HS.fi: Patenttikiista söi lähes 10 miljardia Samsungin markkina-arvosta). This all goes to show that there is a lot happening within the business and that is why I believe it is worth making a study on the sector.
Previous research done about perceived value whichconsumers’ experience when using smartphones is hard to find. For example Helkkula and Kelleher (2010) have done research about perceived value related to iPhone’s service experience, but as the market is quickly changing I believe it to be highly relevant with an overview of what type of perceived value people experience today.The model I have chosen, A Theory of Consumption Values (TCV-model) by Sheth, Newman and Gross (1991), for conducting the study is a well-established model about customer perceived value and will be presented later on in the literature review section of the paper.
1.1 Purpose with the study

The purpose of the study is to find out what type of perceived value consumers find important in smartphones today. This I believe to be highly relevant because of the situation on the smartphone market, explained above. As also explained earlier, Nokia, which has been the market leader for many years has suddenly dropped to second place and people are talking negatively about the company’s future. The Christmas market will be crucial, as new releases from Apple (iPhone 5), Nokia (Lumia 920 and 820) and also from Samsung (Galaxy Note 2) will be seen. 
By making an in depth qualitative study, based on Sheth et al. (1991) TCV-model, I hope to be able to answer the research question of my paper and thus being able to point out what general customers are looking for in a smartphone today. The research question is:
	Which types of perceived value do young consumers look for when buying a 	smartphone?
1.2 Target group of the study and structure of the paper
I have decided to delimitate my study to young consumers (under 30 years old), firstly because it would be too much to cover all age groups for this paper and secondly because I believe it is the most interesting segment to look at. Young consumers are familiarized with the products and I presume they demand a lot more from the products than elderly consumers would do. By doing this delimitation I am aware that I can’t generalize my results for consumers in general but I believe that is not either the point when doing a qualitative study.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Firstly, I will present the theory, which I will base my empirical part on, in the literature overview section. Secondly, I will briefly go through the methods I have used in my study in the methodology section.Thirdly, I will present the results and analyze them in the results and analysis section and finally, I will end the paper by the discussion and conclusions section. 
1.3 Definition of terms


Will do this later

































	
2. Literature overview

Due to the limited space, I will narrow the literature review to focus on the TCV-model by Sheth et al. (1991). For a more thorough overview of the concept perceived value, view my bachelor thesis (Lindholm 2012: 5-15), which dealt with the concept perceived value in depth. So much can be said, that a lot of information about the concept can be found in Sánchez-Fernández & Iniesta-Bonillo’s (2007) article“The concept of perceived value: a systematic review of the research”.
To jump straight at it, I have chosen to use Sheth et al. (1991) TCV-model as a tool, on which I will support my interview guide, and in the end answer my research question with. This model is praised by researchers as one of the most worked out models on the concept perceived value (e.g. Pura 2005: 515;Pope 1998: 126; Sánchez-Fernández & Iniesta-Bonillo 2007: 442). When I in my bachelor thesis applied the TCV-model on my research question about tablets (iPad etc.), it turned out providing good results. This is why I strongly believe it will serve as a good theoretical model for this product segment as well.
2.1 TCV-model by Sheth et al. (1991)
The theory of consumption values model (TCV-model), is a model which explains why consumers do the choices they do in a consumption situation (Sheth et al. 1991). The model, developed by Sheth, Newman and Gross provides five different types of categories of perceived value which can influence a consumer during consumption. The TCV-model and its categories of perceived value can be seen in figure 1 below and are as follows: functional value, conditional value, social value, emotional value and epistemic value.

[Figure]
Functional value
Sheth et al. (1991) describe that an alternative (product or service) acquires functional value for the consumer if the alternative has extraordinary functional or material attributes. Further the authors point out that this category of perceived value is traditionally seen as the category giving most influence on a consumer’s decision to buy or not to buy an alternative. 
To lift up a couple examples of what it concretely can mean I would like to give a couple of examples of the results from my bachelor thesis. The respondents I interviewed for my thesis, about perceived value of tablets, were clearly most influenced by this category. The respondents mentioned attributes such as the mobility of a tablet, itsdurability, its camera, its weight and its size as important functional values influencing their perceived value of the tablets. (Lindholm 2012: 36)
2.1.1 Conditional value

The second category, in figure 1, is conditional value. This category of perceived value Sheth et al. (1991) describe that consumers perceive if something changes in their life, or in their environment and that they because of this feel value of the product or service.
There are plenty of examples to give for this type of perceived value. If you get sick, you will perceive conditional value from the service of a doctor or nurse. If you begin studying you might need a laptop and therefore perceive conditional value for the laptop and so on. In my bachelor thesis my respondents lifted up perceived conditional value of a tablet because of studies, work and also because of travelling (Lindholm 2012: 36).
2.1.2 Social value

The third category, social value, quite far describes itself what type of perceived value it contains of. Sheth et al. (1991) describe that social value can only be perceived if products, which others can see, for example cars or clothes, are consumed, or if service experiences meant to be shared are consumed. The authors also mention that things like status and communities belong to this category. This means that if you feel added/degraded status or if you feel that you belong to some community through the product or service, you are experiencing perceived social value. 
The respondents in my bachelor thesis mentioned added status, respect and feeling that they belong to a community (especially Apples community) as perceived value that they received of a tablet.
2.1.3 Emotional value

Sheth et al. (1991) describe that an alternative acquires emotional value if you through the product or service get some kind of specific feeling. Also if you manage to keep or preserve a specific feeling by a product or service you perceive emotional value. Sheth et al. (1991) gives an example by mentioning that you for example can have a love affair with a car and therefore get perceived emotional value from the car.
The respondents in my bachelor thesis downplayed the category of perceived value, but still some mentioned that they felt safe by choosing Apples iPad tablet. This they felt because it is the market leader and because so many are talking about the iPad. Some also mentioned they felt fresh and modern by having a tablet. (Lindholm 2012: 36)
2.1.4 Epistemic value

The last category of the TCV-model is epistemic value. Sheth et al. (1991) describe that an alternative (product/service) gets epistemic value if it leads to something new. Also if it leads to curiosity and the need, or longing for knowledge, it gets epistemic value. The authors mean that if a consumer is bored at a specific trademark, simply a change to a new trademark can lead to epistemic value.
The respondents in my bachelor thesis mentioned that tablets gave them epistemic value in that it wakes curiosity and most importantly for some of my respondents it offers a totally new platform for reading. (Lindholm 2012: 36)
2.2 Conclusion of the literature overview
In this short paper I do not have the space to go through what has been studied about the concept perceived value. I have therefore added some sources in the beginning of this chapter for a more detailed picture over this concept. Instead I have jumped straight at the TCV-model by Sheth et al. (1991), by presenting its categories one by one. I have also provided examples both from the creators of the model and from my bachelor thesis which was based on the model. It should be clear by know that this study will also be based on the same model and therefore, I will now go on, to describe the methodology I have chosen to use in this study to answer my research question.

3. Methodology

I have decided to choose in depth semi structured interviews as my method and base the interview guide on the TCV-model by Sheth et al. (1991). This means I will be doing a qualitative study and I will interview 4-8 persons. For the draft I have decided not to go further because I will need space for the results and analysis section and wonder how important the methodology part is for the final paper?  Do we need to go through all the steps below, as I did in my bachelor thesis or is it enough to just briefly present what method we will use and shortly explain why?.... 



3.1 The chosen method

3.2 Discussion about the sample

3.3 Gathering of the data

3.4 The interview guide

3.5 The validity and reliability of the study

3.6 Conclusion of the methodology












4. Results and analysis

Will do this part later

4.1 Results and analysis related to functional value

4.2 Results and analysis related to conditional value

4.3 Results and analysis related to social value

4.4 Results and analysis related to emotional value

4.5 Results and analysis related to epistemic value




5. Discussion and conclusions

Will be done after results and analysis part is finished




