CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY IN PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY:  In sight or not?
1 INTRODUCTION

Business has originally been though to be based on hard values according to old articles. Maximizing profits and shareholder value have been in the centre of the business. Today, the business settingsconsist of relationships between companies’ different actors. The actors also have humane side, furthermore trust between different actors claims softer values. Therefore, it is important to consider ethical aspects of the business as well. Evidence of ethicalness in business is presented in many current articles. 

Pharmaceutical companies have been seen as exploiters of the sick people. The companies have been considered as companies, which just want to gain as big profits as possible no matter of means. This has led to more careful consideration of ethical issues, which are indeed gaining more importance inthe business.Pharmaceutical companies are not just developingnew medicines to cure people. Pharmaceutical companiesare also able to offer better quality of life for healthy people in countriesin whichthey operate.However, the corporate social responsibility (CSR) and the pharmaceutical industry have been seen as enemies.Therefore the research question is the following: are pharmaceutical companies acting in a socially responsible way? Furthermore, if they are, how can this value be seen and is transmitted?

This paper examines the change in the values of pharmaceutical companies and where this has concluded. The corporate social responsibility demands organizational culture, which has suitable attitudes and values against ethical behaviour. Management has a great effect on the formulation ofthe culture. CSR can offer a valuable channel to market the company. Pharmaceutical business is not only based on hard values, such as money and profit, but more on softer and humane values.Acting in a social responsible way helps the company to gain better acceptance among consumers and other parties involved in the business. It offers a tool for companies to position themselves among other companies within the same branch.

This paper is organised as follows: The first section consists of introduction, which gives background information and presents research question. Second section offers literature review, which forms the theoretical basis of the paper. This is followed by third section, methods, which define methodology and data used. In section four, results, is presented the findings based on data analysis. This section is followed by discussion, section five, which portrays major findings with commentary. Last section is conclusion, which is a summary of the findings and results for scholars.
2 LITERATURE REVIEW

Corporate social responsibility (CSR) has many definitions in the literature. The present articles share a common stance: corporate social responsibility consists of legal responsibilities, economicresponsibilities, ethical responsibilities and discretionary responsibilities(Duarte, Mouro and das Neves 2010:104). In this paper the focus is set to voluntary activities, which enhances the wellbeing of society (see Table 1). This view is taken, because it describes the willingness to participate without obligations. 

[Table]

Corporate social responsibility is also separated from the term corporate social performance in this paper. Corporate social performance is more strategic term and serves for the purposes of management to measure factual CSR (Clarkson 1995:98).
3 METHODS

The methodology used in this paper is a descriptive-analytic research(I will seek a source for this and open the concept more). Data for the research is gathered from corporate social responsibility reports of the major pharmaceutical companies and from scientific articles that concern the topic. Finland is too narrow area to concentrate therefore the aspect is worldwide. 

Collected data is analysed with the RDAP scale presented in Clarkson’s article (1995:109)A stakeholder framework for analyzing and evaluating corporate social responsibility. The scale consists of concepts:reactiveness, defensiveness, accommodativeness and proactiveness (see Table 2). Using the RDAP scale it is possible to measure the posture the company has towards social responsibility (see Table 3). The posture is determined by the data available of the philanthropic acts (see Table 4). 

[Table] 

[Table] 

[Table]
4 RESULTS
5 DISCUSSION
6 CONCLUSIONS
