MARKETING YOURSELF: Developing Student’s Self Marketing Skills.

1. Introduction

In recent years the number of out of work graduates possessing a higher academic degree in Finland, has been, at its peak, around 700, in 2009, however, it rose to 1400, whilst unemployed individuals under the age of 25 numbered at 20 900 in 2008 and 30 400 in 2009 (Taloussanomat, 2009). There is no uncertainty that the current economic situation has had an overwhelming effect on employment in the academic community, and everywhere else for that matter. More and more companies have had to let go of, even their most devoted employees, which in turn has made it increasingly difficult for recent graduates to apply for occupations in the academic commune and forced them to compete against a large group of individuals, many of whom possess several years of experience and connections that recent graduates simply cannot equal with.  

Competition is harder than ever; students need to be progressively prepared for working life and know how to sell themselves in employment seeking conditions. First, we are responsible for providing well-educated and skilled employees for businesses and organizations in the employer market place; however, we are also responsible to a second group of customers- those who pay tuition to our institutions to receive the education expected to prepare them for productive and successful careers (McCorkle, Alexander, Reardon and Kling, 2003:196). The goal of any educational institution should be, without a doubt, to provide its scholars with a proper education and also, to prepare them for future challenges of working life. 

The emphasis on self-marketing as a skill has limited coverage in the marketing literature even though “so often students are released into the market with only a hazy idea at best of how to market the most important product: themselves”, (Kitchen, 1994:4). One would assume that if the before mentioned statement holds water, there is a need for the development of students’ self marketing skills. Understanding the job search process, how to find out about job openings; make contact with businesses; and how to effectively market one’s skills, abilities and knowledge, as well as personal characteristics- is vital to both short- and long term career success of students (McCorkle, Alexander, Reardon and Kling, 2003:198).

Possessing the right degree and looking perfect on paper is not always enough to receive employment; an individual must possess the appropriate self-marketing skills in order to prove that he/she is indeed the right fit for the job at hand.  Hardly ever, is there only one person applying for an employment position, therefore one must be prepared for a strong competition and in that competitive situation, the ones who can bring something further to the table whether it is in personal skills or other positive qualities are usually the ones who end up employed. Students must be prepared for an increasingly competitive job market at the entry level and for professional lives that will be characterized by frequent job shifts and career changes. Thus, it is incumbent on faculty to create courses that deliver not only the standard marketing content but also include behavioural learning skills objectives (McCorkle, Alexander, Reardon and Kling, 2003:198). Actions taken by educational institutions to develop their students self-marketing skills are one part of the research problem of this study, which is discussed next. 

1.1 Research Problem 

The purpose of this study is to examine the expectations students have with regards to their self-marketing skills and their roles in the employment seeking process, to explore the existing literature on the concepts of self-marketing and personal branding and finally to investigate whether or not there is a gap between the expectations of students and the expectations indicated by relevant literature. Ultimately, if a gap is proven to exist, i.e. it becomes evident that what the students expect of themselves and what the academic community has suggested are not equivalent; ways of filling that gap will be suggested. 

The function of this study is thus fourfold: (1) to examine the existing literature on self-marketing and personal branding skills, (2) to research the information students have on the before mentioned concepts and investigate their expectations with regards to these perceptions, (3) to establish whether or not there is a gap between students’ self expectations and those provided by the educational commune, (4) to fill the gap, if one is found,  by suggesting ways of improving students’ self marketing and personal branding skills and exploring ways of opening communication so that the existing information on self-marketing can reach its intended audience, only then can the two expectations begin to counterpart.  

The end of term paper will focus on the first mentioned objective of the overall study; i.e. it is a literature review on the existing theories regarding self-marketing and personal branding skills. As sources I plan on using various academic articles and books such as “The Pirate Inside: building a challenger brand culture within yourself and your organization” by Morgan (2004), “Developing Self-Marketing Skills: Are Marketing Students Prepared for the Job Search” by McCorkle, Alexander, Reardon and Kling (2003), and “Marketing yourself: how to sell yourself and get the jobs you've always wanted” by Leeds (1991), in addition all relevant and accessible literature regarding the main topic will be utilized. 

1.2 Aim of the Study

The aim of the end of term paper is to refine ideas and deepen knowledge on the main topic, self-marketing; to cover the major issues and debates concerning the main theme, to discuss the key theories, concepts and ideas, to see how knowledge of the topic is structured and organized and explore what has been studied earlier as opposed to recently, and finally to form a platform of relevant theoretical information needed to proceed to the next step of the study, the empirical component. 

The literature review will be beneficial to students in particular, in that it will provide them with relevant information on the existing theories of self-marketing; it will present an extensive amount of information that students can use to their advantage as they prepare themselves for the working arena. Consequently, the aim of this literature review is not to offer a summary of existing theories that the academic community can merely browse through, but instead to present an analytical text containing synthesis, width, depth, consistence and clarity that will be of use to the individuals reading it. 

I believe there is a need for this kind of research since the business world is relentlessly changing and expectations of employers are constantly changing along with it, competition is harder than ever; a study on self-marketing skills would offer beneficial, if not, crucially important knowledge and for job seekers every where. 

1.3 Structure of the Paper

The paper consists of mainly theoretical information that is applied to the overall objective of the paper and intended to be of use to students in particular.  The theoretical framework is divided in to three parts; first self-marketing and personal branding are discussed and theories around those topics introduced, second interviewing skills and how to develop them are discussed and finally, the overall importance and added-value of self marketing and personal branding are considered.  

2. Self-marketing

The purpose of this chapter is to present existing theory on the topic of self marketing, the importance of it and its relevance for people in the working and/or studying arena. The term self-marketing here, refers to the ways in which we as human beings present ourselves and especially how we do so in job seeking conditions. Personal branding and its growing relevance will also be discussed in this chapter.   

2.1 Personal Branding

Brands and the act of branding have extended their territory from being catchy names and nice logos to something much more meaningful in the business arena. In fact, the brands you own and use have become a representation of who you are or, what you are defined to be; there for their significance has increased a great deal. Branding is indeed everywhere and whether we wish to admit it or not it has become a vitally important theme we should familiarize ourselves with in order to achieve success in the business world.  

It is no longer sufficient that we have and that we create strong product and service brands, we also need to have and create personal brands. To some, personal branding refers to people who brand themselves, attach a symbolic meaning to their character and act according to what their personal brand represents, and to others personal branding consigns to individuals who are clear on their goals, are aware of their strengths and weaknesses, and know how to present themselves in a convincing manner. In fact, there is an ongoing debate on the matter of whether or not people should be considered as brands, and in 2009 a known Branding website; “The Branding Strategy Insider” posted a very interesting discussion on the topic, the debate was held between brand strategists in the United states of America, several relevant arguments were made such as the following by Mark Ritson “…It is a fundamental and very common mistake to assume we can apply our knowledge to the sociology and psychology of the human condition. For both theoretical and practical, and philosophical reason it makes no sense.” and “Branding is the process of managing identity and perception, this can be done for virtually anything.” by Brad VanAuken. The reason I brought some of the content of this debate in to this paper is not to now present my own perception of whether or not people can be brands or to further discuss this subject either, I simply wish to point out that the idea of personal branding, however its defined and despite the different ways people see it, is a current topic worth investigating and it further supports the importance of self-marketing skills.  

2.2 Charisma  

Charisma, defined by the Greek as a gift from God, and other wise known as a feature found in people characterized by personal charm and attractiveness. It is not a quality that one can learn to have, or at least this is the popular belief on the matter; you either have charisma or you don’t, i.e. you are born with it or not. However, could it be possible to enhance and develop personal qualities within ourselves or even create qualities that we have never had? According to Nikki Owen, author of “An Audience with Charisma”, it is. 

2.2.1 Elements of Charisma 

There are a number of globally recognized personality profiling tools available to guide a user towards greater understanding of themselves and others. Yet, profiling charisma has up until recently proved a daunting challenge because of abstract and often, conflicting definitions (Owen, 2008:9). However, according to Owen among others, charisma is not”God given” or inborn; instead it is a behavioural model that anyone can develop. 

The elements of charisma are constructed of five features; first Owen argues that charismatic individuals possess high-self esteem; they feel comfortable within themselves which in turn should convey to others that they are authentic and assertive. Second, they must have a driving force within whereby individuals are living the life based on what is important to them; often referred to as “values”, these drive and motivate behaviour so that individuals appear dynamic and enthusiastic (Owen, 2008:11). Third, charismatic individuals possess a sensory awareness which allows them to read their fellow beings and the mood of others. Fourth, they encompass a clear vision of what they want and where they are headed, “this creates a strong energy of intent, an intensity that others can feel” (Owen, 2008:11). And finally, people who are charismatic have a high level of energy; charismatic people both display energy and concurrently draw it upon them. Figure 1 presents, the five elements of charisma concisely. 

It is important to examine and recognize the characteristics that make up charisma, due to the fact that in self-marketing the focus is on how the individual presents him/herself. Charisma is a crucial characteristic in making a great first impression for instance in a job interview; walking in with all the right elements both internal and external and being charismatic can have a crucial effect on how the job interview proceeds and what the end result is. 

[Figure]

2.2.2 Developing Charisma

One can build up charisma by first carefully examining the five characteristics and then developing and enhancing each of them. Owen (2008) argues that, self-improvement, development and growth evolve through four stages:

1) At first, the individual is not even aware of what he/she should be improving on; this is referred to by Owen (2008) as “unconscious incompetence”.

2) The next stage occurs when the learner becomes aware of their need/want to develop and improve; they become consciously incompetent leading to either the motivation to do something about it or leave things as they are (Owen, 2008: 18).

3) Once a learner has reached the stage of really wanting to self improve and develop self-marketing skills and enhance charisma, it can be said that the learner is on the way to becoming consciously competent. Effectively, they are required to set aside time to practice and focus on implementing the changes they desire (Owen, 2008: 18).

4) The final stage of self-improvement, development and growth refers to the stage where the learner has integrated his/her development requirements and a newly improved performance is being achieved naturally. At this point, the learner is unconsciously competent. 

Clearly, change does not happen over night, thus when individuals truly want to develop themselves, they must take the needed time to do so and carefully examine themselves, recognize their short comings and weaknesses and put in a great effort to become better; to have enhanced self marketing skills and possess charisma. 

At this time, competition for employment positions and for keeping an employment position is harder than ever; having the right diploma and sufficient work experience are, in most cases, the same qualities that the other competitors have as well. Thus, possessing developed self-marketing skills and charisma might very well create the one differentiating factor resulting in the keeping or acquiring of a career. 

2.3 Personal Qualities

Adam Morgan, in his book “The Pirate Inside”, introduces a guide to replacing the traditional view on branding held by organizations in to a more demanding one, what he calls the “challenger culture”. It aims to offer counselling for branding experts on how to build something more from their brand and aids the reader in implementing a broader understanding of the benefits of a “challenger culture” within his/her own organization. Now, this topic per se is not closely linked to self-marketing and on ways of developing it, however “The Pirate Inside” offers great insight on personal qualities that need to be brought out in people in order to achieve success in working life. A set of five personal qualities are introduced by Morgan, they are first and foremost characteristics that challenger individuals creating a “challenger culture” need to bring out in themselves; however four of these five qualities can also be applied in to the development of self-marketing skills as well as personal branding. 
2.3.1 Denting

Denting refers to driving the brand vision, in this case your personal brand, forward and interpreting rejection as a request for additional information. Denters may initially sound like rebellious mavericks, but in fact they share a number of common qualities: they are on a personal mission to drive the brand vision forward, they see themselves as employed by the brand, not the company, they are therefore doing this job for this job, rather than for the one it will get them afterwards, they are happy to embrace tension within the organization rather than dilute the vision of the brand and they do not easily accept the answer “no” – from inside or outside the company (Morgan: 2004:122). 

In actuality, the concept of denting goes somewhat hand in hand with the characteristics of charisma, especially with possessing high self-esteem and having a vision. If one is to present oneself in a confident manner and stand out form the competition, one needs to be able to project a confident presence, clear goals and a true passion and want for the task at hand. 

2.3.2 Binding

Binding refers to how challengers create singularity of direction across a team; it argues that one does not need a single individual at the helm of a challenger brand, but one does need a singular vision, and it looks at how challenger teams have created agreements or “contracts” between themselves and their partners in order to bind everyone in the team to delivering that brand vision (Morgan, 2004: 116). Moreover, the concept of binding refers to a singularity of vision and purpose, even if a group of people is involved.  

The way in which the concept of binding can also be applied to self- marketing, and not just corporate branding comes from the fact that success in business is not based on individual talent and capacity alone; instead it is achieved, often, as a result of team work and the ability to be a functioning and productive member of that team. Being able to convey that one would make a productive team member and that one is aware of how crucial team work is, and can be, for accomplishment in business, and realizing the fact that, in team work, all members are pursuing the same goal is an important feature in the development of self-marketing skills as well as in creating a challenger brand culture suggested by Morgan. 

2.3.3 Leaning

Leaning refers to exposing oneself to risk and knowing how to profit from it. Thus, leaning in to exposure does indeed present a different kind of involvement; it recognizes that to do what is best for a brand’s future success might involve a certain level of risk – “and for someone looking for a rock solid career path through an organization, that may be an uncomfortable thing to contemplate, but if you want to be a Challenger, it’s something that has to be accepted, end indeed leant into” (Morgan, 2004: 169). 

Here again, we can take the idea and concept of leaning, suggested by Morgan as one of the personal qualities needed to create a “challenger brand culture”, and use it to our advantage. Leaning can be used as one method of self-marketing; and it certainly helps in developing self-marketing skills. For example, in a job interview having the courage to take a risk and step outside the box can certainly give a great impression to a potential employer; however one should of course know which risks are worth taking and which are not. In any case, exposing oneself to risk is a desirable and looked for characteristic in today’s ever changing business environment, it certainly proves that an individual is willing to work hard and be ambitious to achieve goals.  

2.3.4 Refusing

What a Challenger individual refuses to accept defines them as powerfully as what they have a passion for (Morgan, 2004: 116).  The word, “refusing”, does portray a negative impression, however in this context; it is meant to be something positive, it is meant to communicate a different kind of passion. Refusing encourages us to not accept “that the category has to be that way, or the trade relationships have to be that way, or the consumer relationship has to be that way” (Morgan, 2004: 181). 

According to Morgan, central to one’s ability to refuse is also a very strong sense of what a brand should be in the first place – despite what anyone else may think on the matter. The old saying “those who stand for nothing will fall for anything”, applies well here; it is a sign of character and personal strength to refuse to do something against one’s principles and sense of morals. Applying this notion to self-marketing; showing good and firm character, the courage to refuse an issue that one is against, if such an issue even comes up of course, is definitely a characteristic that may most likely enhances the representation one gives of one’s self. 

3. Interview Skills 

The purpose of this chapter is to discuss interview skills and present methods of enhancing ones abilities on the matter; in addition this chapter aims to give high quality and usable information for job seekers and students as to how to present themselves interviews and encounter with potential employers and colleagues. One needs to bring out the best of ones’ self and truly prove that one is the best person for the employment position, consequently good interview skills are also a sign of good self marketing skills. 

3.1 Success Factors

Great self-marketing skills come from having confidence in one’s self, setting goals and following them through, putting effort into the work one does and producing better quality through that effort and most importantly, believing in one’s self and in one’s abilities to succeed in working life. In other words, one should determine what one wants, figure out one’s future goals and aim for them, prioritize, and in addition, one should be able to do all this while recognizing the interdependence of those actions.

Dorothy Leeds, in her book “Marketing Yourself: How to Sell Yourself and Get the Jobs you’ve Always Wanted”, suggests ten success factors needed in order for one to sell one’s self and portray one’s most marketable skills, these will be discussed thoroughly in the following sub-chapters.  
 
3.1.1 Adaptability and Commitment 

3.1.2 Communications and Creativity

3.1.3 Decision Making and Evaluation 

3.1.4 Foresight and Independence 

3.1.5 Team Spirit and Value Added Marketing

3.2 Knowing the Market

3.3 Reaching the Goal

4. Summary 

This chapter will present a summary of the before mentioned theories and concepts in a concise and clear manner. 
5. Conclusion and Recommendations 

This chapter will present an over all conclusion of what has already been discussed, gives recommendations relating to the topic of self-marketing and finally, presents areas for future research. 