Using repertory grid techniques to explore factors affecting customers’ choice of mobile phone
1. Introduction 
With the fast development of technology, customers’ requirements to communications devices such as mobile phones or computers have increased a lot. Take mobile phone as an example, when this product was invented, it can only provide basic services such as making and receiving call from long distance, sending SMS messages. Nowadays, almost all the mobile phones support other additional services such as internet access, camera, MP3 player and GPS. Apart from these functional features, customers also make trade-off among different prices, brands or other selective factors when making purchase decisions. 

At present, mobile phone dealers are facing with fierce challenges from both their competitors and high-demanding customers. In the mobile phone market, there are mainly twenty-seven brands of mobile phone. All the mobile phone dealers are constantly changing their mobile phones features and lowering their prices to attract more customers. Nokia CEO Stephen Elop recently said that faced with growing competition and a changed business environment, the company will have to adjust itself faster (http://english.peopledaily.com.cn). This announcement indicates that the fierce competition and changed business environment call for more attention on customers’ real needs and require mobile phone dealers to learn more about customers’ decision-making processes. Doing so, mobile phone dealers can better meet their customers’ needs and therefore increase customer satisfaction. 

The objective of this study is to take a mobile phone dealer’s point of view to find out factors that affect customers’ buying decisions on mobile phones. When one plans to buy a mobile phone, he or she is likely to analyze every aspect of a mobile phone before making decisions. For example, he or she may consider different functions such as internet access, gaming or camera. He or she may also think about other factors such as price, handset or multimedia capabilities. This paper expands individual customers’ own understandings and judgments on different brands of mobile phone to reach his or her unique set of constructs, which lead to the final decision making. Thus, the real factors that affect their buying behavior will be explored.

This paper starts with reviewing the previous study in customers’ choice of mobile phone and how other researchers conducted their study on this topic. Then, the paper explores the repertory grid method. Specially, the use of repertory grid in marketing study and how this method contributes to reaching the aim of the study are discussed. Personal Construct Theory which is the basis for repertory grid technique will also be presented. Thereafter, in the empirical study part, nine customers will be interviewed and the results of the empirical study will be analyzed. And finally, the managerial implication and limitations of this study will be discussed. 

2. Literature Review
From a marketing perspective, customers’ choice behavior can be divided into five steps, including need, information search, evaluation of alternatives, purchase and post-purchase evaluation (Dorsch, Grave, and Darden, 2000). Heikki et al. states that the five-step model is usually suitable for making decisions in a rational purchase behavior (2005). However, in many situations, customers may not know exactly what they need and have limited information to evaluate all the alternatives. Just as Newell and Simon (1972, as cited in Riquelme 2001) pointed that decision maker are not always rational, but they are “rationally bounded”. In other words, it is impossible for mobile phone buyers to assess all information available. Therefore, certain methods should be used obtain insight into customers’ motivation.

In previous studies, there is few literature discussing factors that affect customers’ choice of mobile phones. Keikki et al. (2005) use group interviews among graduate students in Finland to study how Finns make their choice on mobile phones. The study has found that Nokia is the most popular mobile phone brand in their interviewees’ mind. Moreover, they also found out that price, new features, size of the mobile phone and brand are regarded as the most important factors that affect Finnish students’ choices of mobile phones. Liu (2002) did her study in Philippines and she mainly focused on how different activities such as advertising affect consumers’ choice of mobile phones. In her study, she used regression analysis, which focuses on the relationship between a dependent variable and one or more independent variables. Her study indicated that size and brand of a phone can affect consumers’ choice of mobile phones. Riquelme’s (2001) study suggested that prior experience of mobile phone choice can affect consumers’ future choices. 

In this paper, Repertory Grid Technique is used in order to know how individual develop their own ‘rules’ to guide their buying behavior and how they make choices when buying mobile phone. The following text will focus on the origin of this method and how it works.

3. Repertory Grid Technique
3.1 What is repertory grid?
Repertory grid has become a widely used technique in various fields, ranging from the original application in psychoanalysis to social and business research area. It is a data extraction and analysis technique rooted in Personal Construct Theory, which was developed by George Kelly in 1950s.

According to Kelly’s Personal Construct Theory, people construct their concepts with their experiences. This means that people perceive the world with their own understandings and have the freedom to choose a different understanding of what he or she experienced or thought. In other words, each individual builds a system of constructs to interpret everything around. Therefore, if we go in-depth of how these constructs are built, we can find that these constructs have bipolar dimensions. For instance, we know that, based on our experience, some people are easy-going while others are not. When we meet a person for the first time, we may consciously or subconsciously categorize him or her according to that construct. Another important point of the Personal Construct Theory is that each individual has his or her own unique set of constructs. In addition, differences in people’s construct systems contribute to their different perceptions of the world and their behavior in it.

In fact, it is this inherent difference in construct systems between people that results bias in research. Repertory grid was developed in an attempt to minimize the construct bias. It is a way to understand what theories people are using to make sense of something. Roger & Ryals (2007:596-597)defined repertory grid as a research tool that elicits the underlying constructs that people use to interpret what is going on around them and that inform their decision-making. Jankowicz (2003:14) interpreted repertory grid as a form of structured interviewing, with ratings or without, which arrives at a precise description uncontaminated by the interviewer’s own viewpoint. 

3.2 Four research stages of repertory grid technique
3.2.1 Element selection
When we do repertory grid analysis, the first step is to choose a set of elements. The elements are the things that we are going to examine and should be consistent with the objectives of a study. For example, elements can be companies, cities, events or products. Usually, the elements are decided by the researcher or elicited through discussion.
3.2.2 Construct elicitation
The second stage of using the repertory grid technique is to conduct personal interviews with consumers in order to elicit the content and hierarchical structure of the subjective meanings, in the form of bipolar constructs that they attach to the set of elements (Dalton and Dunnett, 1992). In this stage, each element will be related to one pole or the other of the construct.

Basically, there are three interviewing methods in repertory grid analysis: triading, laddering and pyramiding. Triading is a method used to ask the interviewee to compare three elements chosen at random and describe how two of them are similar and different from the third (Kelly, 1955). If you want to elicit the more abstract values of the constructs, the “laddering method” is suggested. It is method used to ask interviewee which pole of the construct they prefer and why it is important to them (Hinkle, 1965). Further more, if you want to elicit the concrete benefits of each construct, you are suggested to use the “pyramiding method”. It is usually ask the interviewee what defined their preferred construct pole (Landfield, 1971).
3.2.3 Element comparison
After each interviewee completing a repertory grid questionnaire, it is time to examine the relationships between their bipolar constructs and the set of elements. It is an important stage because the structural similarities, structural differences and the content of interviewees’ construct system will provide critical information for researchers. In this procedure, grids are used to describe the elements and constructs. Construct poles are recorded to explain the importance of the construct and its meaning. Then interviewees are asked to rate each of the element according to the construct poles created. At last, the researcher will get a richer picture of the overall structure of interviewees’ construct system.
3.2.4 Data analysis
In this stage, you can not only use quantitative method to interpret the nature of the grid but also use the qualitative method to maximize the richness of results and understanding of individual interviewee. In quantitative analysis of repertory grid, the output of which represents the elements as they are categorized by the group as a whole while the constructs with the highest variance can be identified, grouped into similar themes and used to define each of the components (Metzler and Neimeyer, 1988). Burr and Butt (1992) stated this quantitative technique as a good way to organize the information collected from each participant in the personal interview. However, qualitative analysis of repertory grid focuses on coding the qualitative data taken from the grid and the constructs themselves as well as interviewees’ explanations.

3.3 Why repertory grid technique is used in this study?
As mentioned before, this paper aims to figure out the factors affecting customers’ choice making of mobile phones, it is crucial to know how customers’ making their purchase decision. According to Roger & Ryals(2007: 596-597), the constructs that people use to explain what happens around them can inform their decision making and repertory grid is such a research tool that can elicits people’s underlying constructs. Kelly (1955) also indicates that people’s construct systems contribute to their different perceptions of the world and their behavior in it. Therefore, I believe using this method could explore the real factors that affect customers’ choices between different mobile phone brands. 

Previous studies (Wilska 2003; Riquelme; 2001; Jone; 2002; Liu 2002) on this topic all used questionnaires to collect data for studies. As all these questionnaires are designed by the researchers before hand, therefore researchers’ personal opinions about mobile phone choice may somewhat affect interviewees’ choice. Sometimes they are forced to make choices between different answers which probably could not reflect what customers’ real thoughts. Using repertory grid as a tool can avoid this problem and stimulate the underlying factors that affect customers’ choice of mobile phones. Rogers and Ryals(2007: 601) state that researchers can capture interviewees’ perceptions of nebulous concepts and probe below the surface into areas of ‘unawareness’ and get a clear understanding of how they use their past experience to make judgments. 

Except advantages mentioned before, there are three other advantages listed by Roger and Ryals (2007:611). The first advantage of repertory grid technique is that it can minimize the influence of the interviewer. Beside this, repertory grid can also help researchers to explore the unarticulated concepts and constructs that underlie people’s responses to the world. More over, repertory grid technique can also help researchers to assess the underlying realities in situations where the cultural or people issues are particularly strong, and where interviewees might hard to express their true minds. 

4. Methodology
As the aim of the study is to find out factors that affects customers’ choice of mobile phone. I firstly select six known mobile phone brand which are Nokia, Apple, Samsung, Motorola, Sony Ericsson, LG. And then add “the ideal one” as a brand to help marketers to know exactly what kind of mobile phone customers really need. 

The data was collected from nine interviewees aged from 20 years old to 30 years old. All the interviews were done with assistance of computers. Before doing the interviews, all the interviewees are given detailed tips on how to use the repertory grid software with the help of computer to ensure the validity of the data being collected.

The research used four processes to complete the repertory grid (see Table 1).
[Table]
5. Results and analysis
As mentioned before, the repertory grid interviews were conducted with nine customers aged from 20 years old to 30 years old. A total of 45 constructs were obtained from the nine interviewees. Then I combined the same constructs and very some similar ones, for instance, I contribute ‘fashion’ and ‘up-to-date’ to ‘novel’, ‘thin’ to ‘portable’, and ‘attractive’ and ‘smart’ to ‘better design’. After this process was conducted there were 16 constructs left. Among these 16 constructs, 5 constructs were mentioned by four or more interviewees and the rest constructs were mentioned once or twice. Table 2 shows all the 16 constructs and their numbers, while Table 3 presents the frequency count of constructs.
[Table]
[Table]
Of all the constructs, 11 constructs (69%) were mentioned by more than one interviewee. One construct (‘Novel’) was mentioned by six interviewees, two other constructs (‘Keypad’ ‘Nationality’) were mentioned by five interviewees, ‘Price’ and ‘Function’ were mentioned by four interviewees, and ‘better design’ was mentioned three by interviewees. Therefore, I think these constructs which were mentioned more than or equal to three times should be very important in the interviewees’ perceptions of these brands.

From the overall results, Apple and Nokia are regarded to be the top two brands when considering novel and price. The two brands are also regarded to have good performance in function and entertaining. In a matter of fact, all of my interviewees describe Apple in a quite similar way: fashionable, entertaining, touch screen, expensive, novel and multiple functions. Nokia, on the other hand, holds the second or third place on all these aspects mentioned before.

From the results, we can also see that Samsung is considered to have a moderate performance. While at the same time, interviewees’ perceptions about LG, Sony Ericsson and Motorola changed greatly. Some interviewees consider Sony Ericsson as a brand suitable for young people, fashion looking and with big population of usage and Motorola as a brand for older people, lack of multiple-function and with small population of usage. While some regard Motorola as a brand to be practical, multiple-function and better design and LG as a brand to be Asian, non-practical and ordinary design. 

It is interesting to find out that ‘quality’ which seems to be an very important factor that affects customers’ choice of mobile phone mentioned only once of all the nine interviewees. This is probably because ‘quality’ is a relatively abstract word to differentiate different brands of mobile phones. It is also interesting to know that one interviewee differentiate these brands by whether or not the company produces other electronic products and s/he indicates that the ideal mobile phone should be produced by companies like Nokia that only produce mobile phones. 

To sum up, novel, price, function, nationality and keypad are the five constructs that are believed to be the most important in interviewees’ point of view. The results obviously show that seven out of nine interviewees think Apple is a brand that is much closer to their ideal mobile phones and Nokia is a brand that ranks after Apple. Meanwhile, two out of nine interviewees believe that Nokia is a brand that is much closer to their ideal mobile phones and Apple is a brand that ranks after Nokia. As to other brands such as Samsung, Sony Ericsson, LG and Motorola, their positions in interviewees’ mind are changing greatly. 

6. Managerial implication
From the empirical study, we know that novel, price and function are considered to be very important factors that affect customers’ choice of mobile phone. In this sense, from the product perspective, managers should lay much attention on the mobile phone’s novel and functions. In addition, most customers consider their ideal mobile phone should be fashionable and multifunctional. Therefore, it is wise for managers to improve the design and the functions of their mobile phones. From the results obtained, keypad is also regarded as an important feature that consumers tend to take into consideration while buying a mobile phone. In a matter of fact, most people prefer a mobile phone with touch screen or with both touch screen and keyboard. This trend indicates that managers should keep up with customers’ real needs. Apart from this, entertaining, portability and popularity are also import factors that can affect some customers’ choice of mobile phones. 

We can also find out from the empirical study that nationality is one of the most important factors that affect customers’ choice of mobile phone. This fact indicates that brand building is very important for mobile phones. In the interviews, mobile phones such as Apple and Nokia which have a clear brand image and mobile phones such as LG, Samsung, Sony Ericsson, and Motorola have a relatively vague brand image in customers’ minds. Therefore, from a brand building perspective, managers should try to build a clear brand image for their mobile phones through marketing strategies. 

Besides, when price the mobile phones, managers should also be careful. All the interviewees in my study said that the price of their ideal mobile phone should not be too low. As the ideal mobile phone for most interviewees should be well-designed, multifunctional, novel, good brand image and portable, most interviewees think the price for such a great mobile phone should be a bit high but not too high. 

7. Limitations of the study
In this study, I think there are some limitations of both the methods and the findings. First, as there is limited time to collect large amount of data, only nine interviews are conducted in this study. This may somewhat affect the reliability of this study. If more data are collected, new factors that affect customers’ choice of mobile phones may be generated. The second limitation of this study is that the bipolar constructs of repertory grid may not helpful because meaning can be contested. As Marsden and Litter (1998) stated that words in different contexts may have different meanings which may results problem when interviewing people from different field of work. Concerning the limitations of the findings, limited data may restrict the interpretation of the findings. When interpret the finding, some constructs are combined based on the interviewer’s own knowledge, so this process may affect the results of the findings. 

8. Conclusions 
This paper aims to explore the real factors that affect customers’ choice of mobile phones. In the study, repertory grid technique is discussed. The study shows that this approach offers managers a great alternative to explore customers’ underlying factors that affect their choices of mobile phones. The results of the study show that novel, price, function, nationality and keypad are the most important factors that affect customers’ choice of mobile phone. However, as there are limited data, I think other factors generated in this study should not be ignored by managers when they produce and market their products. In the end of this paper, managerial implication and limitation of this study are discussed. 
