Inequality in Finland - is the "Europe 2020"-Strategy Focusing on the Right Things?
                                  

1     Introduction
Income inequality has been on the rise in Finland during the past decades.
Firstly, the functional income distribution has shifted away from labour income
to, increasingly, favour capital income. While labour's share of the national
income was 69.4 per cent in 1993, its share in 2007 had shrunk to about 56.3
per cent according to official statistics. On the contrary, capital's share grew
from 15.6 to 29.8 per cent in the same period. Secondly, the change in the
functional income distribution has also affected the relative income distribution
between households. For instance, the income share of the lowest income decile
shrunk from 4.9 per cent in 1993 to 3.9 per cent in 2007 while the share of
the highest income decile grew from 19.2 to 23.9 per cent respectively. In fact,
during the period 1993 to 2007 income shares shifted from the eight lowest
deciles, which all saw their shares shrink, to the top two, who consequently
grew their shares on the expense of the former.
    One of the reasons for this development can be traced back to the tax reform 
in 1993 where the separation of capital and labour income taxation tilted
the income distribution in favour of, often capital rich, high income earners
(Ruotsalainen, 2011). Another reason is that social benefit payments, which
are predominantly directed at the lower income groups, have not kept up with
the rise in living expenditures (Savela, 2008). With this in mind the Finnish
Government of Prime Minister Jyrki Katainen adopted a new growth strategy
in June 2011, called "Europe 2020", which specifically emphasizes the impor-
tance of reducing poverty. Namely, one of the key objectives in the strategy is
to reduce the number of people at risk of poverty in Finland from 920 000 to 770
000 by the year 2020. This is to be achieved mainly by countering social and
economic deprivation through various support programmes and increased so-
cial benefits, but also by increasing employment rates and promoting economic
growth. In addition, in a bid to balance public finances, the Government has
also announced changes in the taxation of income.
    Although some level of inequality is an inherent, and necessary, by-product
of economic growth, many argue that excessive inequality is not only socially
detrimental, but could potentially also have negative effects on economic growth
itself. Higher levels of inequality might, for instance, lower domestic demand
and affect investments through changes in the way capital is accumulated and
used (Ehrhart, 2009). It might also give rise to increased social instability
and criminality, and, in the presence of a welfare state, higher taxes and rent
seeking behaviour by those enjoying social benefits (Alesina and Perotti, 1994).
The peculiarity is that these effects are not merely a product of some level of
absolute poverty, although they are highly interrelated, it is the relative poverty
within a community that can cause these detrimental effects. Thus, the "Europe
2020"-strategy raises a few questions which this paper hopes to answer. Firstly,
is focusing simply on the reduction of the number of those at risk of poverty
the most efficient way to proceed? Surely, there is nothing wrong in helping the
poor, but if the reduction in poverty among the poor is not equal to, or greater
than, the increase in prosperity among the rich, the net effect would still be more
inequality. Secondly, are the proposed measures going to reduce inequality? It
should be obvious that if the Government were to combat inequality, it should
focus on the causes of the problems rather than merely alleviating the symptoms.
Lastly, inequality is more than just an economic question, it is above all a social
and moral dilemma and what we ought to ask ourselves is: what kind of a
society do we really want to live in? The answer to this question may have
deeply rooted implications for the welfare state model we so highly regard.
    The paper continues with a general review of the economic literature on in-
equality in Section 2. The following section, Section 3, gives a historical account
for the recent evolution and causes of inequality in Finland. Section 4 discusses
the proposed measures of the "Europe 2020"-strategy, its appropriateness and
implications for the future development of inequality in Finland. Section 5
concludes.

2     Income Inequality and Growth
One of the first attempts to model the relation between income inequality and
economic growth was done by Kuznets (1955) who examined the long run ef-
fects of economic development on inequality. The study found that the long
run relation between economic development and inequality tend to follow an
inverted U-shaped curve, where countries in the early stages of development
experience increasing inequality, while countries in latter stages, developed be-
yond some threshold value, will see decreasing levels of inequality. Intuitively,
structural changes due to the industrialization of developing countries will in-
creasingly favour firm owners as workers are trapped in lagging (agricultural)
industries. However, once a certain level of economic wealth has been achieved
and the transitional effects have started to level out, the gains from the in-
creased overall wealth will increasingly be more evenly distributed due to the so
called "trickle-down" effect. Although the Kuznets curve might provide a rough
guidance on the long term dynamics of the inequality and growth relation, it
has been criticized for not adequately accounting for cross country differences.
For instance, one of its critics, Fields (1980, p. 94) argue that the level of de-
velopment alone cannot explain the between countries differences in inequality,
rather the determining factor is the interplay between the political environment
and the type of development. Building upon this notion the reminder of this
section examines this interplay more closely and in the spirit of this paper I
specifically focus on the causation going from inequality to growth instead of a
more general review of the two way relation.

2.1    The Economic Channels
The channels through which inequality may affect growth may be divided into
two sections; the purely economical channels and the politico-economic channels.
I start with the former. Increased inequality may affect growth through its
impact on the accumulation of physical, and human, capital and aggregate
demand (Ehrhart, 2009). First, in the presence of imperfect capital markets
the poor may not have access to capital which they could invest productively
in production or education. If the relative amount of poor people is high and
capital is predominantly allocated among the rich, the lack of adequate collateral
among the poor creates a situation where lending across the income groups is
scarce (Piketty, 1997). Suppose that the initial wealth of the borrower is low, in
this case the borrower has less to lose if his or her investment goes bust. Thus,
when the personal risk is low, the borrower has an incentive to borrow more, in
relation his or her wealth, and to be less cautious with his or her investment.
This implies that the flow of capital from rich to poor would be scarce and,
due to high demand, high interest rates would further decrease the access to
capital for the poor. This lack of capital may even become persistent, stretching
over generations (Piketty, 1994). If current generations of poor people cannot
adequately access capital, and thus climb the income ladder, future generations
are also in risk of being trapped in the same situation. Moreover, this persistency
problem is aggravated if a person's functional status, whether a person is an
employee or an employer, depend on his or her initial wealth. Indeed, Banerjee
and Newman (1993) find that poorer people tend to become (low income) wage
earners while richer people become (high income) employers.
    Second, growth might also be affected by inequality through changes in
aggregate demand. More specifically, the different consumption patterns of
poor, middle class, and rich people, respectively, will determine not only the
size of a country's economy but also its composition (Murphy et al., 1989).
For the sake of argument, assume that poor people mainly consume necessities
(food, clothes, etc.), middle class people consume, apart from necessities, also
increasingly manufactures (cars, mobile phones, etc.), and rich people consume
all goods available, including luxury goods. Additionally, when the level of
income of a person increases he or she, rather than consumes more of one good,
expands the range of goods consumed. Thus, in the case of extreme inequality,
and consequently no middle class, demand for manufactures would be little or
non-existing. This lack of demand would lead to a state where no modern
technology would be developed and the economy would not grow. The same
is true for the opposite scenario of extreme equality. In this case everyone
would only demand necessities and the outcome would again be that no modern
technologies were developed.
    Building on this argument Jaramillo (1995) shows that less inequality also
affects the size of the economy through employment and income effects. A less
unequal income distribution would see a rise in the demand for manufactures.
To meet the increased demand firms would hire more workers and the sector
would start developing. With the new technologies labour productivity is driven
up which lowers prices and increases demand even further. Thus, less inequality
can stimulate growth through its positive employment effects on modern sectors.

2.2    The Politico-economic Channels
Inequality does not only have direct effects on growth, rather, political, social,
and economic factors jointly determine the outcome of inequality. First, an
unequal distribution of wealth may cause rent-seeking behaviour and increased
rates of criminality among the poor (Alesina and Perotti, 1994). This combined
with increased social and political instability may effectively restrain the growth
of the local economy and deter foreign investments.
    Second, and perhaps more importantly for developed countries, fiscal policy,
determined by a democratic voting process, is likely to affect the returns on
investments and, thus, growth. The basic reasoning is that the more unequal a
country is, the more voters will favour candidates who advocate redistributive
fiscal policies. Since these policies often target the rich capital income earn-
ers, higher taxes will decrease the returns on investments, investments fall, and
so does growth (Alesina and Perotti, 1994). Thus, the effects of inequality on
growth are two dimensional; where the former is an example of the political and
the latter of the economic dimension. However, developing the argument fur-
ther, including different types of inequality and redistributive policies, reveals
a more complex structure. When considering the functional distribution of in-
come, that between employees (wage earners) and employers (capital earners),
one would expect that when the share of capital income of the median voter
increases, the following capital tax rates (assumed to be proportional) are ex-
pected to fall (Bertola, 1993). Conversely, the lower the income of the median
voter in relation to the average voter, the higher the taxes are expected to be
(Alesina and Rodrik, 1994). Arguably, the effects of higher capital taxation
also depend on the form of the redistributive measures. For instance, if the tax
proceeds are used to finance public investments, some of the lost returns on
private investments can be recouped if the public investments are used promote
growth. Such measures include e.g. investments in infrastructure, education,
and the business environment. On the other hand, if the taxes are used to sim-
ply redistribute income from the rich to the poor, all the gains of redistribution
are accrued by the poor and, consequently, the returns on investments are lower
than in the former case.
    The same conclusions can also be drawn in the case of proportional income
taxation. This scenario differs from the functional approach in that it does not
distinguish between labour and capital income, rather it focuses on the differ-
ence in income between (presumably working) individuals. Again, if the income
of the median voter is lower than that of the average voter, one would expect
the voting process to render higher taxes (Persson and Tabellini, 1994). In sum,
more inequality is expected to raise taxes through an election process where can-
didates who favour redistributive income policies are elected by the relatively
poor. Higher taxes will in turn lower the marginal return on private investments,
which decreases capital accumulation and, thus, growth. However, the above
presented is indeed sensitive to its underlying assumptions. As Saint Paul and
Verdier (1996) point out, the effects could even be the reverse if the assump-
tions are changed. First, if e.g. inequality is concentrated among the poor, an
increase in inequality may not necessarily worsen the relative position of the
median voter in relation to the average voter. Second, different voter groups
may hold different weights in the political election process. Thus, taxation could
be more dependent on the political power balance than on the relative wealth
of the median voter. Third, the framework is not able to capture the effects of
progressive taxation and following redistribution of income. Fourth, taxes may
affect rich and poor people differently. For instance, because rich people have
more possibilities to evade taxes, the marginal tax might actually be higher for
poor people. Thus, according to Saint Paul and Verdier (1996) the preferred
tax rate may actually drop when inequality increases.
    With this in mind, the question one should ask oneself is: what are the im-
plications of these findings on public policy? Since capital, physical and human,
plays a big part in the inequality/growth debate, it seems logical to start here.
The prevailing consensus seems to be that investments in human capital could
provide a key in promoting both more equal societies and increased growth.
The reasoning starts off with the assumption that capital exhibits decreasing
returns to scale, implying that those who lack capital (i.e. the poor) have higher
marginal returns than those who are capital intensive (i.e. the rich). Thus, the
gains from redistributing wealth to be spent on productive investments and ed-
ucation among the poor could very well be large enough to outweigh the losses
incurred by the rich (Bénabou, 1996). Of course, this assumption requires that
the redistributed wealth is indeed used on productive investments. One has also
to keep in mind that the effects of the policy heavily rely on the population's
marginal propensity to invest (Lee and Roemer, 1998). Further, investments in
education have sizable feedback effects on inequality and growth. Namely, in-
vestments in education will, in addition to promote growth, reduce inequality as
wages increase (Saint Paul and Verdier, 1993). Reduced inequality in turn raises
education levels and, thus, growth (Perotti, 1993). For these reasons Bour-
guignon (2000) suggests that rather than redistributing income, which would
have negative effects on capital accumulation, redistributive policies should fo-
cus on distributing wealth more evenly, where the benefits would outweigh the
losses. Lastly, it seems that the goal of any public policy should be to avoid
both extreme inequality and extreme equality and to ensure adequate demand
by maintaining an economically healthy middle class (Matsuyama, 2002).


3    Inequality in Finland - a Historical Review
The increase in inequality in Finland during the last couple of decades can
be largely attributed to the tax reform of 1993, where the taxation of capital
income was separated from labour income taxation (Ruotsalainen, 2011). More
precisely, after the reform labour income was still progressively taxed while a
fixed tax was imposed on capital income. As the fixed tax rate was lower than
the progressive rate for high income earners, this meant that they could minimize
their tax burden by converting their labour income to capital income. This
development has lead to two outcomes. First, the functional income distribution
has shifted in favour for capital income earners. Figure 1 shows the development
of the functional groups' shares of national income in Finland during the time
period from 1975 to 2010. Here labour's share is measured as all compensation
paid to employees and capital's share as the net asset and firm income. The
share of taxes on production and imports is also included. During the period
1975 to 1990 two patterns arise. First, the functional distribution is somewhat
constant during the entire period; labour's share fluctuates around 65 per cent
of national income, while capital's share is fairly stable around 20 per cent.
Second, taxes' share of national income grew steadily from about 10 to 15 per
cent, contributing to decreasing income disparities during the pre-1990's period.
After 1990 these patterns break down, however. First, during the crisis of the
early 1990's firms' profits dropped remarkable which increased labour's share,
reaching a high in 1991 of almost 75 per cent. The more recent crisis that
started in 2007 show a similar pattern, though the effects do not quite match
that of the previous one. Second, during the entire post-1993 period, except for
the crisis years, labour's share decreased to below 60 per cent, while capital's
share increased by a third, almost reaching 30 per cent in 2007. Meanwhile,
taxes' share stopped growing and has been quite stable at around 15 per cent.


       
[Figure]


    Second, high income earners have benefited most out of the development in
functional income distribution. Figure 2 shows the evolution of the percentage
shares of disposable income according to wealth deciles during the period 1976
to 2010. The increase in taxation during the pre-1990 period seems to have
helped close the income distribution gap. In fact, the income dispersion was
at its lowest in 1987 when the difference in shares between the richest and the
poorest was merely about 13 percentage points, 7 percentage points lower than
it was in 2007. More generally, income shares were quite stable up until the tax
reform in 1993, the effects of which were immediate; between 1992 and 1993 the
bottom seven deciles lost on average 0.15 percentage points of their respective
shares, while the top three either maintained or grew their shares. The biggest
winner of the reform was undoubtedly the top 10 per cent who grew their share
with almost 1 percentage point. This development continued all through the
90's and the beginning of the first decade of the 21th century. In fact, by
2007 the top income decile had grown its share by 5.7 percentage points, the
second highest decile with 0.4 percentage points and the bottom eight lost on
average 0.76 percentage points off their shares. While the biggest winner in this
comparison is beyond doubt, worryingly enough, the biggest losers are found in
the bottom three income deciles who lost on average 1.1 percentage points each.
    Although the main cause of this development can be attributed to the change
in the functional distribution of income, the situation of the poorest have been
aggravated further by the real decline in benefit payments (Savela, 2008). Figure
3 shows the nominal and real change between 1994 and 2008 in some benefit
payments which specifically target the lower income groups. Although real
wages increased during the 14 year period, thus mitigating the negative effects
on the middle class, all but pensioners of the most vulnerable societal groups

NB: The first two entries are for the years 1976 and 1981, respectively. Yearly
comparisons only start from the third entry at 1987.

[Figure]


(low income earners, the unemployed, young families, and students) saw their
benefits shrink or barely increase. Thus, the change in the income distribution
in Finland during the past two decades is the result of three developments.
First, tax policies have increasingly favoured the rich. Second, though losing
out on the functional distribution of income, the increase in real wages have
helped mitigate the losses among the middle class. Third, the decrease in real
benefit payments has made the situation of the most vulnerable classes of society
worse off than anyone else. Conclusively, if the "Europe 2020" is to have a real
impact on poverty in Finland it needs to address these fundamental issues and
not merely try to alleviate the symptoms.


4    Inequality and "Europe 2020"

