The future of video game retailers in Finland: Will video game distribution become digital?

Introduction
Recently, there has been much discussion concerning the future of distribution of video game software (henceforth referred to as video games). The changes can concerning this industry perhaps best be seen in the drastic increases in digital sales in recent years, and decreases, or very small increases in physical retail sales of video games (Makuch, 2012), (Willingham, 2012). Historically video game software distribution has followed similar patterns to the distribution of music records and motion pictures (Williams, 2002). There are several similarities between the products; notable exceptions being the higher price and digital size of video games. The digital sale of music is predicted to exceed physical sales globally in 2015 (Barton, 2012). Similarly publishers also predict that digital sales will exceed physical sales in video games as well (Prescott, 2012).
 It is commonly accepted that, at the moment, the video game retail industry consists of: specialist retailers, super-stores, and digital retailers. Most companies have both digital and physical distribution, though there are some that focus exclusively on digital sales.
As a relatively new phenomenon the impact of digital sales has been noted, but little research has been done to study what impact it will have on the market. Much research has been done concerning changes in the music industry due to digital sales, such as Bockstedt, Kaufman and Riggins (2005) on artists becoming distributors with digital content, bypassing traditional retailers and distributors, Leyshon (2001) on changes in the music industry, as well as Zhu (2001) on distribution of digital videos. However, little to no research has been done on the similar process that is currently in progress with video game retailing. The question is whether research done on the music industry can be applied to the video game retail industry?
The impact of decreased retail sales has been the closing or bankruptcy of specialist retailers in several markets. This paper hopes to show that the trend will continue and digital sales of games will exceed physical sales in the foreseeable future. Based on previous research into the music industry and a survey, this paper will attempt to predict the future market of video game retail. However it is also likely that while physical retail will decrease in importance it will most likely not entirely disappear, due to sales of used games.
The remainder of this paper will be structured as follows: An empirical part consisting of a survey of customers who buy video games, results of the survey will be applied to existing theory. Based on the empirical and theory part discussion concerning the implications of the results. Finally conclusions concerning the future of the video game retail market in Finland.

Theoretical framework

Distribution of video game software and the development of it can in many ways be compared to the music industry as well as the motion picture industry. Similar developments are evident in that both are moving toward a digital distribution model of software. The music industry, with smaller file sizes and widespread use of Mp3 players, such as the IPod; with its own online store; is far ahead in this development and should therefore provide a suitable model to predict the development of video game distribution.
Before the early 2000s the average speed of internet connections was too low to allow for distribution of music over the internet (Lam & Tan, 2001). Much the same could be said of video game distribution, perhaps much more so as a typical game can range from a few megabytes (MB) to over ten gigabytes (GB) for larger games. Hence the emergence of digital distribution of video games has been far slower for video games than for music. 
Lam and Tan (2001) predict that better networking technology will lead to the rise of the Internet as an “infotainment hub”, which will be the main source of information and entertainment. In Finland this is well exemplified in households with broadband where the service provider can offer a TV and motion picture service, for example Sonera Viihdepaketti (Sonera, 2012) , whereby the customer can rent movies digitally and in fact gets their TV channels through high-speed internet, as opposed to traditional broadcasting methods. In the USA services utilizing high-speed internet for video game distribution in the form of cloud gaming, where the games are streamed directly to the end user from the provider, are common with companies such as OnLive and Gaikai providing cloud gaming services.
Lam & Tan (2001) identify a number of steps that traditionally were part of music distribution. Those are:
1. The artist signs a contract with the record label to leverage on the core competency of the latter, such as marketing and distribution
2. The artist records the album and the record label produces the album in some media such as CDs.
3. The retailers buy the CDs and other media from the record label.
4. The consumers buy the CDs and other media from the retailers.
(Lam & Tan, 2001)
The video game industry is very similar in that singular video games are usually developed by a certain video game developer that specializes in the creation of games. Acclaimed developers include Blizzard, Bioware, Epic Games, etc. Generally the developer is only responsible for the game software itself. Publishers perform much the same functions as record labels; marketing and distribution, as well as making the software into a physical product, such as game boxes with DVDs. Publishers often also finance the development of the video games they distribute, oftentimes owning the developer. The publishers sell to retailers, who sell to customers. Well known publishers include Sony, Nintendo, Microsoft and Electronic Arts.

“Electronic markets also have the potential to reconfigure fundamentally the competitive bases and contestability of markets. Thus not only do electronic markets have the potential to break down established market hierarchies through disintermediation, but established firms may well be disadvantaged as markets are reintermediated through electronic channels. Established firms tend to have significant sunk costs within physical infrastructures, and it is for this reason that electronic markets offer significant competitive opportunities for new or marginal competitors within existing industries” (Leyshon, 2001). Though many traditional video game retailers have made investments into digital retail they have much smaller market shares than in traditional retail. A matter that is further complicated by the fact that for certain platforms they are essentially locked out from distribution. For example the various consoles have their own exclusive digital stores, such as Xbox Live and Playstation Network. The same applies to the ever growing market of smart phone games where the most popular operating systems, Apple’s iOS and Google’s Android have their own App stores from which games can be bought.
While it is difficult to estimate how the digital market is divided, as the major retailers do not share such information, certain estimates can be made. Concerning the PC market, in 2009 Impulse, one of the competitors of the market leader Steam, estimated the market share of Steam to be 70 % of PC digital video game distribution (Graft, 2009). Though it is important to note that Steam is exclusively on the PC and consoles generally have their own digital distribution operated by the manufacturer of the console, such as Playstation Network for Playstation 3, and Xbox Live for Xbox 360. Thus complicating digital distribution on consoles since distribution requires approval from the manufacturer.
An important edge that can be attributed to physical stores, over digital retail, is the sociopsychological aspect of physical stores (Lam & Tan, 2001). Lam and Tan (2001) contend that stores are social gathering places for listeners of music, which the internet cannot provide. Stores also provide various music-related commodities. They suggest consumers can be enticed to return to stores by means of “engaging and meaningful experiences”. When it comes to video game retailers, specialist retailers are the most apt comparison. In Finland the only truly large scale specialist retailer of video games is Gamestop. Most other retailers only have a click-and-mortar presence or video games are only part of their inventory, such as Verkkokauppa.com, CDON.fi, etc. However at least internationally Gamestop has received a lot of critique from casual customers, who sometimes find that they are treated badly for perceived ignorance(Customer Service Scoreboard, 2012).
Another advantage online distribution has over traditional retail is the minimal cost and online distributors can therefore use competitive pricing strategies (Lam & Tan, 2001). While physical stores can serve an important role as platforms for marketing, an online presence offers much greater control over the expenditure and tracking of marketing. Digital retailers also work quite well as marketing platforms. Digital retailers may easily gather extensive databases of their customers buying preferences as well as behavior, allowing focused marketing and special offers (Lam & Tan, 2001).

Data Collection
(Survey still incomplete due to lack of webropol access, therefore no actual data represented yet. See appendix 1 for questions potentially used in the survey)
Data collection will be an online survey, done via webropol, due to time efficiency as well as that those who already use the internet will be more likely to represent those who are more likely to use digital retailers. There will be selection bias as respondents will be chosen on a self-selection basis. I.e. Those who respond. Naturally this will lead to the target population being mainly students with an age range of 18-30, however as this represents a significant amount of the spending power it can be of use. The average game player is 30 years of age in the USA (Entertainment Software Association, 2012).
Discussion
“Like the newspaper, the hardcover book, and the compact disk, the expensive disc-based method of video game distribution is on its way out, a process that's only accelerating as more developers and publishers test out alternative pricing models both on PC and console platforms.” (Onyett, 2011).
Many prefer the convenience of digital downloads, not having to leave their home to go to a specialist retailer. For example among hardcore gamers launch days of popular products usually lead to cues outside retailers. This is especially the case with midnight or early launches, where retailers will open their stores or keep them open for longer for the launch of a popular game. This often leads to long queues to even get the game or in the worst case the product selling out thereby leaving customers without a copy. For example the launch the Elder Scroll V: Skyrim caused massive queues to form in Helsinki (Bethesda Softworks, 2011).
As mentioned earlier developers have traditionally been forced to rely upon publishers for marketing and distribution as well as financing for projects. However digital distribution may cause this whole dynamic to change, as it gives the possibility for developers to gather financing, market and distribute on their own. For example the crowd funding website Kickstarter, has become a source of financing for many developers, allowing them to gather financing and market their projects without publishers. Video games such as Minecraft have been successful in distribution on their own through the developer’s website, being distributed exclusively digitally, as well as being marketed mainly through word-of-mouth.
There is an opportunity for new players to enter the market due to digital distribution. Even with the possibility for this created by electronic channels as Leyshon (2001) points out, will most likely not happen on a large scale. This would be due to several factors. As mentioned earlier consoles and handhelds are largely locked to the manufacturer’s distribution platforms, and PC is mostly dominated by Steam. The possibility of multiple distributors does exist, but is unlikely. The switching cost and convenience of using one platform may be a major factor. While many developers may use several distributors for digital products, consumers tend to prefer one platform.

One advantage of physical retailers is the used games market and older games. Many older games do not exist as digital copies and never will. However as Onyett (2011) points out in the future it is in the best interest of developers and publishers to be digital only, since used games that change hands through a third party, such as Gamestop, generally do not generate any income for the publisher or developer. A certain segment of the market will still of course want physical copies, but major publishers are moving toward digital only, such as Electronic arts, with its Origin digital service and developers, like Blizzard, with attempts to create a “Blizzard-only social network” (Onyett, 2011). Old games are also being converted for newer systems and released in digital format exclusively. For example many older games released for the Nintendo Entertainment System, console from the 1980s, are re-released as digital-only products on current Nintendo consoles.
So far it is mostly the PC market that has embraced digital distribution. “This kind of flexibility is possible in the PC market because there's no official oversight. There's no Nintendo, Microsoft or Sony to give the ultimate 'yes' or 'no' as to whether something's viable.” (Onyett, 2011)
The Steam platform, for the PC, is a great example of the convenience and aggressive pricing available for digital retailers. Steam has sales every weekend and daily sales that last 24 hours, where a product may be discounted with up to 75 % Such discounts are only possible because the product is digital and the cost of producing an additionally product is virtually zero. This encourages buyers to check the service on a daily basis.
From a developer perspective there are many advantages in digital distribution. 
1. Bypassing publishers, mean higher profits
2. Lower costs
3. Reduced second hand sales
4. Products may generate sales long after traditional life cycle is over 
Many smaller, so called “indie” developers now choose to publish exclusively digitally, with physical copies being sold as a premium product, if sold at all. 
Especially Smartphones are well suited to digital sales, given that most smartphones owners have online capability for their phones, and will likely represent a significant amount of digital sales in the future.
The rise of so called “free-to-play” games may also spell the death, or at least decline, of traditional disc-based games, and with them physical retail. Free-to-play being a business model where the game itself is given away for free and revenue is generated either through in game transactions or advertisements. At least in mobile gaming the trend is towards “free” games, with 65 % of the top 100 grossing games in June 2011 the revenue generated from “free” games on the Apple IPhone, compared to 39% in January 2011 (see figure 2). Since the game is given away for free a cost of a digital product is generally out of the question. If the future of gaming is in “free” games the future of gaming will also mostly be digital.


[Figure]

[Figure] 

Cloud gaming is a possibility that would take the video gaming experience completely digital, as users would not even need a console or any other form of gaming device, but rather everything would be handled digitally over the internet. This would effectively kill video games as a physical product as there would be no use for it.

Conclusions
The trend in video game retail is moving towards digital distribution at the cost of traditional retail. This is of benefit for both the customers and developers, but will most likely spell the doom for video game retail as it is today. This may be a slow process as there are still vast markets without access to high speed internet, which in large parts is a prerequisite for this change. There will also always be those who want a physical product. Those are the same people who want to hold their morning newspaper in their hand as opposed to reading the same news from a screen. However they will have to pay a premium for this “luxury” in the future, and they will likely not be picking it up from a store, but rather have it delivered to them.

What will remain of the physical products for video games will in the future most likely take the form of collector’s editions and other such premium packages, and be significantly more expensive than the digital product, where the product paid for is not so much the game itself, but rather extra content to complement it.

In conclusion it is likely that the video game market will follow the music distribution industry and move to a mostly digital presence, with some physical presence. Physical stores will be around for now, but will mostly disappear as they cannot compete with digital and mail order prices due to higher costs of maintaining a physical store.


