Introduction
Analysts and investors use a lot of different information to analyze and valuate companies and determine trade prices within stock markets. This information could include anything from earnings announcements and press releases, to authority warnings. Efficient market theories suggest that investors are rational and thus security prices reflect all publicly available information of that specific security (Scott 2003:92). From an accounting point of view, it is the accounting information that is of interest, and whether the accounting information affects security prices. And indeed early studies show that this is the case, e.g. Ball and Brown (1968), and Easton and Zmijewski (1989) to point out a few. Efficient market theories thus suggest that investors quickly adjusts security prices after publication of different information.
But are markets fully efficient? Several anomalies exist about market efficiency, and two early studies were made by Foster, Olsen & Shevlin (1984) and Sloan (1996). Foster et al. (1984) studied a so called post-announcement drift of the stock prices and they found out that the market did not adjust security prices after announced unexpected earnings, but the price tended to slowly drift towards the efficient price. 
Sloan (1996) investigated the effect of accruals and cash flow components on earnings. His study showed that the cash flow component of earnings is more persistent than the accrual component, and in an efficient market investors would take this into consideration when making investment decisions. Sloan found out that this was not the case. Investors seemed to “fixate” on the earnings number only, instead of decomposing it into cash flows and accruals, and therefore securities were mispriced.
In the field of accounting and finance it is common knowledge that the balance between relevance and reliability determines the decision usefulness of the accounting information to analysts and investors. The more relevant the information is, the more decision useful it is. Relevance here means more forward-looking information and this is useful for investors in the sense that they will better know how the company will perform in the future. It is then the company executives who decide which accounting methods and policies are used to produce this relevant information for investors (Scott 2003). 
This raises the question whether the executives chooses accounting methods that truly reflects the underlying economic situation of the company. Is the accounting information reliable? The accounting standards today leave some room for executives to use their own judgment in choosing accounting policies to keep relevance in the accounting information. If that information were made fully reliable, in form of setting rigid accounting standards that leave no room for forecasting the future, it would be of no use for investors. The numbers would tell nothing about future performance and thus investors would have to determine the value on basis of other information (Scott 2003).
If company executives use their own discretion in choosing accounting methods and policies, could they use this power to manipulate the accounting numbers? Could this have an effect on the security price, and how would they manipulate the accounting information in such a case?
This type of manipulation of accounting number is called earnings management. A commonly known method of doing this is through accruals (Scott 2003:371). And as the Sloan study has shown, accruals does have an effect on security prices. Or in other words, through high accruals the value of a security could be mispriced. This raises the question whether company managers can affect the market value of the company through manipulation of accruals?
Several studies, e.g. Teoh, Wong & Rao (1998) and Richardson, Sloan, Soliman & Tuna (2005), have shown that companies in different circumstances, that have high unexpected accruals, do lead to security mispricing. And as mentioned these high unexpected accruals are considered an indication of earnings management. In financial theories this type of evidence seems to more common than evidence that securities are not mispriced due to high accruals. Why do not investors see the earnings management in form of high unexpected accruals? Accounting information is publicly available and due to all studies made on the effect of accruals, one would think that investor would have learned to take these into account when making investment decisions. 
This paper tries to find evidence of investor rationality in form of investors considering high accruals in their investment decisions. The research question therefore is: due to prior evidence of the effect of high unexpected accruals on company value, have investors learned to detect earnings management and reflect this in the security price? First, theory about earnings management will be introduced. Second, studies that speak for market inefficiency will be presented. Third, studies that speak for market efficiency will be shown. The last part will summarize and conclude the findings. 
Earnings management
Scott (2003:369) defines earnings management as “..the choice by a manager of accounting policies so as to achieve some specific objective.” Questions of interest here are which the objectives are for the managers to achieve, and what the incentives for these objectives are. This chapter will focus these incentives, rather than earnings management techniques. 
Earnings management can be “good” in the way that managers manipulate earnings to communicate inside information to investor, e.g. by smoothing the company performance, and thus giving investors more persistent stock earnings. However managers can manipulate earnings opportunistically for their own benefit, at the cost of other company stakeholders. This type of earnings management reduces the reliability of income numbers. This is because of the income decreasing effect of managing earnings through the common identifiable technique, which is high discretionary accruals (Scott 2003:368-369). 
The remainder of this chapter will have the focus on the “bad” side of earnings management. Thus by the term earnings management I refer to the actions of managers, driven by different incentives, to mislead other company stakeholders. And more specifically mislead analysts and investors.
Stock market purpose
Managers may have incentives to affect the stock price of the company. E.g. unlisted companies do not have a publicly recognized market value. If the company is about to go public, an incentive for earnings management occurs. Since it is shown that analysts and investors do use income numbers to value companies, managers try to achieve as high income numbers as possible before an initial public offering, IPO. The connection here is that the higher the income numbers are, the higher the first public stock price for the company is (Scott 2003:382). 
As evidence will show, earnings management for stock market purposes does not occur only surrounding IPOs. There are different types of situations, such as meeting investor expectations, where earnings management occurs. 
There are also additional incentives for earnings management, such as contractual motivations, government regulation,taxation motivations, changes of the CEO and communication to investors (Scott 2003). However, these incentives falls outside the scope of this paper and thus the concentration will be on earnings management for stock market purposes. 

Remainder

From this point forward I will present researches that support market inefficiency and that suggests that investors do not detect earnings management in form of high unexpected accruals. I will also try to find evidence that investors do detect earnings management in form of high unexpected accruals and embed this discovery in the stock price.
