Introduction

Refined research question
How are good customer oriented strategies built?
Introduction
We are living in an increasingly global and technologically advanced world, where competition amongst companies is intensifying and increasing faster and faster. When the company receives new equipment, it is already old, and when they have come up with a new product or developed a new service, it does not take long until other companies also produce the same product or offer the same service. It can thus be difficult for companies to find a lasting competitive advantage, especially in their operations and offerings. (Thomson & Hecker 2000; Wright & Snell, 2005)
It has thus become very important and relevant for companies to look within themselves and try to find what differentiates their business from other businesses. The difference between great success stories and tragic failures is hair thin and it is thus critical for companies to understand the importance of a good customer oriented strategy - or rather a fitting customer oriented strategy, to make them stand out from the crowd. In recent years we have seen examples of both success stories (such as Apple, Spotify, and Kone - who all have very customer oriented strategies) and tragic failures (such as Nokia and Myllykoski - who have not had fitting customer oriented strategies)
In the academic world it is becoming more and more clear that customer oriented companies are the ones prevailing. A good customer oriented strategy can make a company and just as easily a bad strategy can break it, yet few companies have truly customer oriented strategies (Grönroos 2012). This might partially be because building a fitting, truly customer oriented strategy, is not easy. On one hand, they must be planned, but on the other hand, they need to be flexible as they are constantly changing and evolving. Another reason might be the blatant fact that companies just have not realised the advantages a customer oriented strategy brings, or that they just do not know how a customer oriented strategy is built.
Scholars from the Nordic School, with leading member Christian Grönroos at the top, have published many articles on how companies should become more customer oriented, unfortunately the amount of customer oriented articles being published in other countries is very low. Also, few of these articles offer companies practical advice on how to do this, especially when it comes to building a customer oriented strategy. So the question still remains: How are good customer oriented strategies built? This paper will focus on answering this question thus giving companies insight into what they can do to make their strategy more customer oriented, or build a completely new customer oriented strategy.  The paper will be divided into four sections: literature review, methods, results, and discussion, with the focal point on the literature review and discussion.
Litterature review
According to Collis and Rukstad a strategy is a company's game plan on how they are going to come closer to their vision. Th core of a company's strategy is made up of three factors; Objective, scope and advantage. The company's objective is a certain goal, or many goals, that they set out to achieve. In order to have a truly customer oriented strategy, this objective needs to be customer oriented. A customer oriented objective could be getting rid of a problem the customer has, making something easier or providing her with a totally new solution. What ever the objective, it has to be precise and clear. A time frame for reaching the objective must also be set to give it such clarity. This is also important from a measuring perspective (Collis & Rukstad 2010)
The scope frames the climate where the firm is active, or more importantly sets limits and boundaries for where it will not be active. It is very important for company's to clearly specify their scope, since many have the problem of trying to do to much instead of focusing on their core competence and capabilities. Setting boundaries with the customer as focal point will lead the firm to orient according to the customer and set limits and boundaries accordingly. (Collis & Rukstad 2010)
For company's to obtain their given objectives within their specified scope, they need to understand their advantages over other company's. What makes them more innovative and better than their competitors. This is crucial for companies to know since it is what will help them achieve their scope. This can also be seen from a customer perspective. What is it that makes customers choose one firm over another? (Collis & Rukstad 2010)
There are also many other parts of a company statement that effect the strategy thou they are not a part of the actual strategy. These factors must also be taken into consideration since they are deeply intertwined with the a company's strategy. First there is the company's mission i.e. why they exist. Why is it they are here? An example of a customer oriented mission is Spotify's "We want to connect millions of people with their favourite songs and create a service that people love to use. We believe music should be easily accessible and that listening to music will make people live richer lives. We want to create a win win situation for people who love listening to music and people who love creating music." (Spotify 2012)
Second are values and operating principles. These act as guidelines and rules inside the company, but at the same time they also gives the outside world an understanding of how the company thinks and acts. In other words, this gives both customers and employees value. Having customer oriented operating principles acts as a way for signalling to customers that they are important to the company. It makes the company not only think with the customer in focus, but also act with the customer in focus. (Collis & Rukstad 2010)
Third is vision. A company's vision is what they strive to be and how they want to be perceived. As Marketing Director and Innovator for Aktia Abp, Marc Hinnenberg put it: A company's vision is like the sun on the company's horizon. It is something that is clear and constant but distant in the future. It is the goal that a company aligns everything else to. (Hinnenberg 2012)
Finally the business model determines how value is created and how it is delivered to the consumer (Teece 2010). The business model is thus more about the practical things such as cost structure and processes both within and outside the company. These processes constitute a large part of what kind of strategy the company can manage. For example if a company has very product oriented processes and a non-flexible cost structure, then a customer oriented strategy is almost impossible to incorporate into the company's statement. Whereas if the processes within the firm are customer oriented and the cost structure allows for flexibility, the company might not be as sensitive to volatility in the market and thus have room for a more customer oriented strategy. (Collis & Rukstad 2010)
All of the above mentioned statements need to be customer oriented and aligned with one another in order for a company's strategy to truly be customer oriented. This is where many companies go wrong and try to only have a vision or mission that is customer oriented. Whilst a company doing so might look like a customer oriented company with a customer focused strategy, it does not take long until the layers start to crack and the true orientation of the company is revealed.
Method
The sampling method used in this paper is criterion sampling. Criterion sampling is when respondents or interviewees are chosen based on a certain set of criterions that are important in order to obtain the right kind of data (Patton 2002: 243-344). In this paper the criterions where 1. the respondents had to be experts working with strategic responsibilities, 2. have founded their own companies and 3. be willing to give an in-depth interview about strategy both on an academic level and on a everyday business level.
Based on these criterions two semi-structured, in-depth interviews were conducted with two respondents. In order to protect the identity of the respondents they will in this paper only be mentioned with their initials. The first respondent, K. S., founded a management consultancy company in 1994 as has been the partner responsible for the strategic process. He has been active in the academic world for almost 20 years and is currently a professor at three different universities all around the world. The second respondent is A. S. She founded a training and coaching company in 1997 and written three books on the relation between strategy and business models. 
The data collected in these interviews has been transcribed and categorised so as to be easier to analyse. The data will be presented in the following section.
Results
"It is customary to define both a mission and a vision. In our case it was to act as a platform for people to learn and become experts. We thus had a mission directed at staff. our vision was that we wanted to create a situation where we were respected and considered the best experts in our field"

Discussion
