Internal auditing within municipal organizations: From the perspective of internal auditors
Introduction
Internal auditing has ever since World War II been a part of almost every larger business, but recently it has become a necessity and an essential activity in different organizations around the world (Burnaby, 2009). Internal auditing can be dated as far back as 4000 B.C. to the Near East, when organized businesses and governments started to implement formal record-keeping systems in order to correctly account for collected taxes (Ramamoorti, 2003). Richard Brown (1905, quoted in Ramamoorti, 2003) stated that the roots of auditing were born when “the advance of civilization brought about the necessity of one man being intrusted to some extent with the property of another, the advisability of some kind of check upon the fidelity of the former would become apparent.” The internal auditing methods of today really started to evolve during and after the World War II, when The Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) was founded in 1941 (Ramamoorti, 2003). 
Internal auditing is commonly understood as an entity within a business, with a purpose to analyze the financial statements and give the management detailed evaluations and proposals for improvement regarding risk management, control, and governance processes. The information that internal auditors can produce can be of great importance to a company and its future, as long as the management understands to take the information under consideration. However, if the internal auditing isn’t operated effectively it might not have any value to the organization. 
Studies by Rainer (2012), concerning the importance of the internal auditors, suggest that internal auditing, as a profession, has been wrongfully diminished when the debate regarding the financial crisis has been on. Rainer also states that recently the value of the internal auditing has started to be questioned. Kapoor (2012) is in the other hand stating that the profession of internal auditing is under transformation. This development of internal auditing has been caused by the increased complexity of a global market, corruption, fraud, and new laws and regulations. 
Even if there have been several studies made about the internal auditing as a profession and its importance, few of these studies have been made as a case study from the perspective of an internal auditor and about internal auditing in a municipal organization. This is why the question still stands concerning how internal auditing is viewed at by those working with the profession. 
This study focuses on presenting the profession of internal auditors and the internal auditing process. The empirical part of this study concentrates on presenting how internal auditing is viewed at by the internal auditors, and to be precise, by the chief auditing executives in municipal organizations. The theoretical part of this study presents internal auditing, what it exactly is, what benefits it can have, what risks that might interfere with the auditing process, and what kind of characteristics an internal auditor should or might possess. The aim of this study is to examine whether or not there is a difference between the internal auditing process within municipal organizations and what have been presented in the theoretical part regarding internal auditing. 
This paper is structured into five sections of which the introduction is the first. The second section will present the theoretical aspects concerning internal auditing, how it is performed, what the benefits and risks are, and what describes a good internal auditor. The third section will present the data collection method. This section will give information on the used research methods and why these methods have been chosen. The fourth section will introduce the results of the research. The last section will discuss the conclusions of the results and present possible need for future researches. 
Literature review
1.1. Internal auditing
The Institute of Internal Auditors (2004) defines internal auditing as following:
Internal Auditing is an independent, objective assurance and consulting activity designed to add value and improve an organization’s operations. It helps an organization accomplish its objectives by bringing in a systematic, disciplined approach to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk management, control, and governance processes.
The Institute of Internal Auditors provide information regarding the internal audition profession and how it should be performed. They also provide educational and development opportunities to organizations, and place standards and regulations over how internal auditing can be implemented. (IIA 2012)
To break down the definition of internal auditing we need to look into the different aspects of internal auditing. The organizational independence of internal auditing is essential for it to work as effectively as possible, and it should be established by the reporting structure. The objectivity of internal auditing is accomplished with a suitable mentality. Internal auditing focuses on analyzing risk management, control, and organization’s governance by evaluating their effectiveness, protection of assets, that laws and regulations are followed, and reliability of financial information. Internal auditors draw conclusions from the obtained results and try to assess how these are managed in the different areas. In addition to the above mentioned tasks, internal auditors also evaluate values and ethics inside the organization, performance management, and how information regarding control and risks are communicated within the organization. If flaws or opportunities for improvement are detected, internal auditors provide recommendations in how to materialize the changes. (IIA 2004)
The chief audit executive (CAE) is the supervisor of the internal auditing activity. The CAE describes the range of the internal auditing activity, authority, and the importance of independence for the audit committee, which either approves or rejects the proposition. (IIA 2004)
Internal auditing can be divided into two levels: continuous auditing, and separate auditing evaluations. (Ahokas 2012: 42)
Continuous auditing materializes as a part of the daily activities of directors, the management, and the rest of the employees as they perform their assignments. Internal auditing is usually designed to include continuous auditing operations, and when these operations are performed efficiently and broadly the need of separate evaluations is reduced. Continuous auditing includes regular guidance measurements, comparisons, and evaluations. When continuous auditing is included in the recurrent operational routines, it will perform in real time, react to changing circumstances, and become firmly established as a part of the company. (Ahokas 2012: 42)
Continuous auditing has become a necessity for organizations in order to improve efficiency and effectiveness of internal auditing. This has been caused by the increased organizational accountability and pressure from the regulatory instances. Also according to a survey, which was performed in 2006, there were experiences of fraud in 75 % of the researched organizations. These organizations were either large public companies, with a revenue of >$250 million, or state and federal government agencies. Because of increased fraud and corruption, organizations have started to implement continuous auditing. (Smith & Warren 2006)
Separate evaluations are performed on important processes that have been chosen in beforehand. Usually a process will be evaluated when there has been a change within its operational environment or if there is a higher risk focused on the process, relatively. These evaluations can be performed on separate surveillance positions or on the whole control system. The latter is evaluated if a significant alteration in strategy or management is prepared, or if a large acquisition is taking place. When evaluating separate processes, weight is usually put on evaluating sporadic controls and parts of the process. Evaluations are generally performed according to a scheduled auditing plan, but if a need for an evaluation arises, it can be performed diverting from the schedule. (Ahokas 2012: 43)
1.2. Risks restraining internal auditing
Cronyism and favoritism are factors that can place a risk on the reliability of the internal auditing reports, but also on implementation of these reports. This is a problem that is more or less encountered within family firms, but can also be seen in other organizations. The effect of internal auditing is dependent on the management’s and director’s ability to implement the results that internal auditors present. Therefore favoritism and cronyism can have a negative effect on establishing of businesses and management’s ability to implement internal auditing reports. (Bezirci, Keles & Özkan 2011)
Favoritism and cronyism, caused by social-connections or family ties, can lead to recruitment of less-skilled employees in wrong positions. This will most likely affect the performance of the firm, and therefore negatively affect the internal auditing. In order to hide the poor performance from the general knowledge, the internal auditing reports might be left acknowledged completely. (Bezirci, Keles & Özkan 2011)
According to an interview in Joris Luyendijks (2012) blog can internal auditing also be affected by uncooperation of employees when investigating errors or suspicions of fraud. This is can be a difficult problem because employees can be afraid of losing their positions in the company, and therefore try to obstruct the internal auditing by leaving vital information untold. 
Interpersonal relations are one of the features that differentiate internal auditing from public auditing. Internal auditing assesses the operations of people, and therefore a relationship is established between the auditor and the auditees. This relationship may cause conflict between the two groups and can therefore be a risk for internal auditing. (Dittenhofer 1997)
Internal auditors may encounter problems when presenting the results of the auditing process to the management. The changes that the implementation will bring can cause resist within the management. The uncertainty is usually caused by fear of what the changes might bring, how the changes will affect the bureaucratic aspects of the company, and by the ego of the management. The management might not be willing to implement the changes because of their egos. (Dittenhofer 1997)
Benefits of internal auditing
Internal auditing provides the management an understanding of the organization, its culture, operations, and risk profile. It provides objectivity, skills, and knowledge in order to add value to the internal control of an organization, but it can also help convince other stakeholders such as employees, authorized representatives, investors, and shareholders. The benefits mentioned above make internal auditing into a   valuable resource for the organization. (IIA 2004)
Managers in large companies very rarely know exactly what is happening in the different departments of the organization, and are therefore in desperate need of information regarding their company. This is where internal auditors step in. Internal auditors can give the organization an understanding of the different processes and the people who run these processes. They are also in possession of knowledge concerning the principles of good management and how to apply these principles. Internal auditing functions as a counsel for the management. It provides objective views on processes, evaluations on potential success or problems with ongoing operations, and it can also provide education to the management, if necessary. (Sawyer 1993)
Businesses are rarely passive and at a standstill. Also because of the constant development of technologies organizations are pushed to constantly develop new working methods in order to improve their business processes. When the information systems and the processes within organizations start to become more and more complicated, the need for an up to date internal auditing process start to become more apparent. Continuous auditing gives internal auditors a way to keep up with the development and secure the validity and reliability of the internal auditing reports. (Smith & Warren 2006)
Characteristics and skills
The position of an internal auditor is a demanding task. In order to keep up with the constantly changing nature of their profession, they need to posses technical skills, competencies, and behavioral characteristics. Internal auditors must be able to fuse together their skills in statistics, negotiation, investigation, computer programming, and politics. (Jackson 2007)
Soft skills, or to be precise, different personality traits are what separate an exceptional internal auditor from an average one. These soft skills feature social dignity, communication, language, friendliness, personal habits, and optimism. (Karan 2011)
Communication skills are essential for an internal auditor to master, since they are constantly in touch with the management, auditees, and co-workers. The continuous task of collecting, sorting, analyzing, and explaining of information to the management and the auditees requires that the internal auditors posses extensive skills in listening, interpersonal, written, and oral communication. These skills are then used to deliver clear and precise information, either in a written or oral form, to the management and the auditees. It’s important that these individuals understand concisely what the internal auditor is presenting. Also because of the fact that these individuals are located on various positions in the organization the requirement of good interpersonal skills is valuable. (Smith 2005)
Methodology
The empirical part of this study is performed by the usage of a qualitative research method in the form of enquiries sent to the participants. The reason for using a qualitative research method was influenced by the theme of the research. The purpose was to study how internal auditors within municipal organizations view their line of work and what they think the role of internal auditing is to a municipal organization. 
The strength of qualitative research methods is the in debt information they can produce. The intention of a qualitative interview or enquiry is to generate information that show more than what meets the eye, in other words the purpose is to build a relationship between the researcher and the respondent. This relationship enables the possibility to create a deeper understanding concerning the problem and to gain a comprehensive picture of the situation. (Holme & Solvang 1997: 92, 99) The purpose of a qualitative interview and enquiry is also to bring forward adequate and descriptive information about peoples experience regarding the theme of the research. Because of the theme of this research a quantitative research method wouldn’t have produced same in debt information as a qualitative research method. A quantitative research method attempts to collect statistical information over the research problem. (Dalen 2008: 9)
There are several aspects that need to be considered when there is an intention of using a qualitative method. First of all, the choice of the respondents has a great influence whether or not the research will be successful. If wrong respondents are chosen, it might lead to valueless research results. Furthermore should the choices be made according to criteria’s, which are defined from what the interview or enquiry should produce. (Holme & Solvang 1997: 101) 
The data acquisition is performed through enquiries sent to chief auditing executives of various municipal organizations. Of the eight sent enquiries, two enquiries were responded to. Both of the respondents wished to be presented anonymously, therefore they are going to be called Respondent 1 and Respondent 2. The enquiries were sent to the respondents by e-mail to ease the round up of the information and to give the respondents’ time to think through their answers. 
The enquiry contained five questions, of which all were formed to give the participants a possibility to explain, in their own words, what they thought about the subject in question. The first question deals with the participant’s opinion concerning what the most important section is in internal auditing and why. Questions two and three deal with how important internal auditing is for a municipal organization and how big of a role the internal auditing reports have in the decision making. Question four deals with what kind of risks can restrain internal auditing. The last question asks about the participant’s opinion regarding the most important characteristics and skills of an internal auditor.

Results
The results are presented question by question in order to make it easier to keep up with the answers of both of the respondents.
Question 1
Respondent 1 is of an opinion that the most important section of internal auditing is to confirm that internal control, risk management, and leading and administrative procedures accomplish its objectives. The reason for this is that a public organization can be regarded as a multi-objective organization, which’s various sections have different logics of operation. Respondent 1 also stated that the basic task of the operation can go missing if the leadership and the management’s tasks are not well-maintained. 
The most important section of internal auditing is, according to Respondent 2, to function as a tool for the group executive board to implement internal control in a diversified municipal organization. In other words, carry out their responsibilities to monitor the profitability of the organization. Additionally the own aspiration of the management is to work as support for the development and reflect on how to perform even better and more efficiently, that is, to provide alternatives to perform better. This is required in order to prevent external and internal risks, which can threaten the present operations of the municipal organization. Also the currently ongoing consolidation of municipalities introduces big changes. In order to not waste the opportunities that the consolidation of municipalities can bring, it is important that the changes are 	controlled by production of assessment data. 
Question 2
Respondent 1 states, that the importance of internal auditing for the municipal organization grows as the organization grows. The larger the municipal organization is, the more important the internal auditing will get. Internal auditing is a significant interlocutor, which produces information in relation to the functionality of processes and which objects should be developed further. 
According to Respondent 2, the internal auditing process is an important source to obtain feedback and factual information regarding process activities, functionality and level of leadership, and realization of placed objectives. For example: how the new management system is working, how objective and indicator hierarchy is founded in a new organization, and so on. Additionally, the management and other persons elected to a position of trust, expect options and their cost effects to support their own decision making, so that the decisions would as impressive and economical as possible.
Question 3
According to Respondent 1, the internal auditing reports have more importance for the functional leadership of the incumbent management. Respondent 1 also mentions that the outcome of the results can also reflect on the institution’s decision-making, but more rarely. 
Respondent 2 states that the role of the internal auditing reports in the managements decision-making depends completely on the audited issue, how important it is, and what the management are prioritizing. The key is to get the operation management commit themselves to potential development measures and the decision-making it demands. Internal auditors report to top management and to the committee. The top management evaluates and aligns which quarters take measures in the matter and then informs the appropriate management through internal auditing. The more extensive the commitments by the management are for the needed measures, the more the importances of the reports are emphasized. The measures and the appointed follow-up actions registered in the report assist also the decision-making. 
Question 4
The greatest risk is according to Respondent 1 that the correct objects are not selected for evaluation according to the risk factor, which can result that the most essential parts are not evaluated. This could be influenced by a lack of a confidential and open interaction and a dialogical connection between the internal auditors and the management.
Respondent 2 mentions that the greatest risk is simply internal auditors’ lack of know-how and that this has not been verified and secured.
Question 5 
The most important characteristics of an internal auditor are, according to Respondent 1, openness, honesty, independence, confidentiality, and competencies in interaction and cooperation. 
Respondent 2 states that the most important characteristics and skills are a strong basic know-how and possible special know-how (to create trust), cooperation and social skills, analyticity and an ability to find and report the essential issues, and an ability to see entities and how things are connected.
Discussion
The results of the study indicate that municipal organizations utilize internal auditing in a way that resembles those aspects of internal auditing that were presented in the theoretical review. This can though be caused by the fact that The Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) have placed standards on how internal auditing should be performed and what it should try to achieve. Even if these standards don’t need to be followed, they give an approximate picture over the most efficient way to implement and perform internal auditing. 
Both of the respondents mentioned that the most important aspect of internal auditing is to provide information regarding the profitability of the organization. They also mentioned that internal auditing provide information to the management over how different processes are accomplished and what could be developed further. This highlights the fact that the process of internal auditing is highly recognizable in both of the organizations. 
The respondents had dissenting opinions over the greatest risk that might restrain the internal auditing process. One of the respondents stated that the greatest risk was that the correct objects are not picked for evaluation, while the other stated that the greatest risk had to do with the internal auditor’s lack of skill. None of the respondents mentioned risks caused by external factors, as for example uncooperation or that the auditing reports might be unheeded completely by the management. They might not have encountered this kind of risks and have therefore left them unmentioned. 
When asked about the characteristics of a good internal auditor, both of the respondents mentioned the importance of the soft skills, as mentioned in the theoretical part about the characteristics of a good internal auditor. Both highlighted the importance of the ability to cooperate and to have good skills in interaction. They also mentioned openness as an important characteristic, which might not be such a common trait in a Finnish employee. Both of the respondents have a similar view, over the characteristics of a good internal auditor, with the theoretical part presented in chapter 2.4.  These findings, and also the findings mentioned in the previous paragraphs, confirm that internal auditing in municipal organizations is performed similarly to what were highlighted in the literature review.
