Risks, Benefits and Disadvantages of Real Estates


1 Introduction

Real estate investment has always been a valued form of investment. Since 2006, real estate investment had strong growth and became a valued form of investment by professional investors. The users of the real estate, or the tenants, provide long-term cash flow, which was tied to indexes. Index therefore provided smoother changes when compared to many other investment opportunities. In recent years, cash flows have been effortless to finance with very loose money market. In particular, the private equity investors found real estates and the cash flow. This brought the corporate investment strategies to the real estate sector.

During 2009, when the financial markets were not functioning properly, the transactions involving real estates decreased. As a result of the development during the past few years, real estate investment is now as prevalent and prestigious form of investment than derivatives, equities, or even corporate bonds. The KTI Property Information Ltd states that real estate investment has been very profitable, and they performed well when compared to different types of investment opportunities. In 2007, for the first time in seven years, real estate revenue increased to a higher level than the stock market and that the bond market.

The sub-prime crisis started a financial crisis worldwide and the world’s economy suffered a recession in 2009. This had a major impact in the real estate investment sector. The sub-prime crisis started in the United States in 2007 and it began when the American banks granted loans to people who default on those loans. These loans were then collected to form a group, or a portfolio in order to achieve the highest possible credit rating from a rating-house, because the loans were distributed through a large number of the borrower’s and the loans were secured by a house or property. The good credit ratings enabled the loans to be sold to investors such as pension trustees for a good price. When it subsequently transpired that the borrower groups were not able to pay for their existing and future obligations, these investment products lost their value dramatically. This ultimately led to the situation where the European countries were in recession and a number of investment targets value decreased significantly.

2 The Risks Involved

The first, and foremost important element in investment activities is to identify potential risks that are related to an investment opportunity. Risk refers to all the potential risks that an investor may face. What are the risks affecting the real estate investment? Is it worth investing in to government bonds than investment than real estate? How real estate investment risks differ from leasing risks?

2.1 Defining Risk

Before the various risks are discussed, it is important to understand what is meant by risk. Risk implies the event, which cannot be predicted in the future. Risk management is a set of procedures that minimizes risks and costs to the investor or business. If the investor were able to foresee risks, the definition would not be applicable. If an investor were able to make the correct prediction of future investment returns, he never would make the investment, which is below the expected yield rate. (Kaleva and Land and Olkkonen,  1997, 87.)

Real estate investment risks can be divided into two different parts. The first part distinguishes the risk between the individual investment risks. The second part distinguishes the possible risks that have an impact on the investments portfolio risk. An investor may consciously define themselves according to three types of risk attitudes. The three different are: neutral, risk averse, and risk lover. (Kaleva and Land and Olkkonen, 1997, 87.)

2.2 Corporate risk

The corporate risk refers to the liabilities and dangers that the investor or business may face. More importantly, the economic success and its impact on the share value is a crucial factor in corporate risk. The proper way to for an investor to avoid the corporate risk is to diversify the contents of their investment portfolio. By diversification an investor ensures greater return with the lowest possible risk. (Brueggeman and Fisher 2008, 385 - 386.)  

Real estate investor’s cash flows and return are generated through rent. Investors face the corporate risk, so that an economic activity, such as recession, decreases and leads to a decrease in rental income cash flows and ultimately, affect the return. Fluctuations in the society’s purchasing power due to recession can influence the value and the rent of a real estate. However, this depends solely on the type of real estate and the lease agreement. (Brueggeman and Fisher 2008, 385 - 386.)  
    
2.3 Financial risk

If the investor chooses to use debt in order to finance the investment, financial risk increases. As the debt in financing increases, the financial risk increases accordingly. Financial risk is closely tied to the terms of debt financing which the investor is able receive from the financial institution. (Brueggeman and Fisher 2008, 386.)

Financial risk, therefore, consists of fixed charges related to equity. These different fixed charges include interest and amortization payments that are tied to a specific point in time. Financial risk and business risk are very close to each other as the higher the investor's financial risk is, the smaller the operational risks the investor may carry. (Leppiniemi 2002, 52.)

In addition, a high proportion of equity used in the investment, implies that the financial risk is relatively low. Similarly, a high proportion of foreign capital leads to the increase in financial risk. Debt leverage is a way in which the investor may raise capital. 

Debt leverage means that the investor aims to increase the equity a way that increases the relative proportion of foreign capital. The basis is that the foreign capital will be paid a fixed compensation. Therefore, in order for the leverage to be positive, all the earnings through the foreign capital must exceed the fixed cost. Ultimately, this increases the returns, as the investor is able to compensate the fixed cost by reinvestment. Henceforth, for the leverage to work effectively, the return on assets must exceed the fixed costs of borrowing. On the other hand, if the return falls below the fixed costs of borrowing, the result is negative, and the leverage is not successful. In this case, the investor has to pay the borrowing cost from equity. (Kinnunen, Leppiniemi, Puttonen and Virtanen, 2002, 241.)

Normally professional real estate investors use foreign capital to finance the investment. When the price of the foreign capital is less that the price to use equity, then the use of foreign capital is favorable. The formula below (equation 2) illustrates how the investor is able to calculate the leverage effect:

[Formula]

2.4 Covenant risk

The covenant risks are understood as contractual guarantees and are subject to special conditions attached to loans. With these special terms to the borrower, the financial institution is able to enforce functional limitations and increase the lender's option to receive more information from the borrower, investor or company. Covenants enable the fulfillment of real securities or to supplement or replace them altogether. Therefore, covenants can be used to reduce the lender's credit risk. (Leppiniemi 2002, 96.)

The covenant risk is also known as Loan-to-Value Ratio, or (L/V). In this case, the financial institution approves 90% in value of the security for the foreign capital. In general, banks do not accept collateral more than 75% -80% of the value of the property. Assume that the value of the real estate decreases, but the cash flow does not change. The value of the real estate is not enough to cover the collateral, because the Loan-to-Value has increased by 98 percent, for example. In this case, a bank usually requires for the investor to increase its amortization or a larger share of equity. (Brueggeman and Fisher 2008, 386.) 

2.5 Maturity risk

Maturity risk is closely linked to the interest rate risk (see chapter 4.3.9). Maturity means the length of the loan period, which it is amortized. The maturity risk occurs when interest increase for instance. Ultimately, this means that the length of the loan period increases and causes more interest payments to the investor. (Niskanen and Niskanen 2007, 32.)

Maturity risk is highly dependent on the current economic welfare. If an economy fell into recession like the Finnish economy has during the years of 2009 – 2010, it does not necessarily mean that the investors are facing a risk. For instance, the current trend seemed to be a decrease in interest rates in order to increase spending. This resulted in an increase in demand for private housing. On the other hand, banks were less keen to provide financing to institutional investors, as there was much uncertainty.
  
2.6 Liquidity risk

Liquidity risk refers to a risk arising from the challenges to transform a real estate quickly into capital. The presence of liquidity risk is continuous in a market, where there are many buyers and sellers but few actual transactions. The harder it is to transform an investment into capital, the greater the risk that the price concessions may be given to another investor. This may occur when the investor needs to sell the real estate quickly. In general terms, real estates tend to have a higher liquidity risk than other investment opportunities, since properties are harder to sell. (Brueggeman and Fisher 2008, 386.) 

2.7 Inflation risk

Inflation is defined as the decrease in the value of money. The rapid growth in inflation may reduce the investor’s expected yield. If the return on investment does not increase at the same pace as inflation does, then it is not enough to offset inflation and the value of the real estate decreases. The impact of inflation for different types of investment opportunities has alternative effects. Some investments tend to have a positive correlation to inflation, some negative. Looking at historical data, it is clear that real estates have generally performed well during high inflation. (Brueggeman and Fisher 2008, 386.)    

2.8 Administrative risk

A real estate, like any other, has the need for maintenance and management in order to maintain its condition and its value. The return, which the investor earns, is very closely dependent on the qualifications of the property manager. Administrative risk therefore occurs when the property manager lacks the necessary skills to maintain the real estate. As a result of this, the value of the real estate decreases. This risk is based on how facility management can be more innovative, to compete in the best possible way and practice business operations effectively. (Brueggeman and Fisher 2008, 386.)   

Cost Benchmarking is also an important part of managing the administrative risk. By cost benchmarking it is meant that how the investor is able to optimally manage the building's maintenance costs. Such action, from the investment perspective, is effective use of capital in real estate, because then the investor eliminates unnecessary costs. Costs incurred through facility maintenance in a long-term serve to minimize unnecessary costs. This is an effective way to improve the profitability of capital invested in the real estate and its productivity. (Cost Benchmarking 2010.)

Cost Benchmarking can be divided into two distinct parts. The first part consists of the office buildings, which include the following: office, retail, industrial building, industrial warehouse, industrial and small industrial estates. The second part of the cost benchmarking includes the residential real estates including the following: apartment, residential, commercial and terraced properties. The benefits from the cost comparison, include such facts that it provides a practical tool that investors can use to compare the costs of the various buildings to each other. (Cost Benchmarking 2010.)

2.9 Interest rate risk

Interest rate risk refers to activities that measure the sensitivity of the return as the interest rates change. This means that the interest rate changes bring uncertainty about the potential income and expenses. In real estate, as interest rates increase, the cost of investing increases since the foreign capital becomes expensive. Changes in interest rates affect all securities and other types of investment opportunities. Depending on the investments maturity, whether it is long-term or short-term, and the change in the price of the investment opportunity can greater than compared to other investments. Real estates are very influential to changes in interest rates, and therefore the return on the investment to investors may change as the interest rate changes. (Brueggeman and Fisher 2008, 386.)

Interest rates may either be fixed, floating or variable during the whole maturity of the credit agreement. In a variable rate, generally a reference interest rate and contract-interest margin is agreed upon. For example, if the reference rate is 3% and interest rate margin of 1.4%, then the interest rate payable under the contract is a total of 4.4%. Credit agreements always agree upon what reference rate is used. Different reference rates are the Euribor, Libor and the prime rate. (Leppiniemi 2002, 90.)

2.10 Legislative risk

Real estates are responsible for several acts, which affect taxes, leasing and planning, as well as other constraints imposed by the State. Legislative risk is current when the government alters the legislation in a way that may have a negative impact on return on investment. (Brueggeman and Fisher 2008, 387.)

Legislative risk is essential when seeking to determine the default interest rate margin. The law for different types of contracts provides the interest rate arrears margin and it is an essential form of risk to the investor. (Leppiniemi 2002, 91.)

2.11 Environmental risk

Environmental risks that relate to the value of the property include unexpected environmental changes, or findings that could harm the environment and property. For example, before there was a tendency to use asbestos as insulation for properties, but today asbestos is considered highly toxic and potentially lethal.

Environmental risk compared to other types of risks could cause more losses for investors, because the property owner is responsible for building and repairing and cleaning the work can easily exceed the value of your property. This type of risk exists when the property is located in an area where there are earthquakes or hurricanes, which can cause damage to the property. (Brueggeman and Fisher 2008, 387.)

3 Benefits and Disadvantages

There are several benefits and disadvantages to direct investment to real estate as well as leasing arrangements. In this chapter these benefits and disadvantages are investigated more carefully.
 
3.1 Lease Benefits

Describing the benefits of leasing

3.2 Lease Disadvantages

Describing the disadvantages of leasing
3.3 Buying Benefits

Benefits of ownership
3.4 Buying Disadvantages

Disadvantages of ownership

4 Conclusions

Concluding remarks