Wage Equation

1    Introduction
The main objective behind this paper is to examine closely the aggregate wage
rate (also known as real wage rate) and study a model that examines it. Ear-
lier studies have examined the wage equation by including measures of union
power, unemployment benefits, tax rates, structural mismatch and productiv-
ity [Manning (1993)][Nickell and Andrews (1983)]. Hall (1986) studied the UK
aggregated wage rate instead, using consumer price index, unemployment rate,
aggregate productivity and average weekly hours.
    Differing from this I have chosen a wage equation where I will examine how
unemployment, productivity, tax wedge and inflation impacts the real wage.
The basic idea behind this is to test if the mentioned variables are stationary
in their second differences, since it is a requirement for doing OLS (Ordinary
Least Squares) regression. A study of this is interesting, since recognition of the
interrelationships can help formatting policies that increases benefits considering
society and corporations.
    The equation studied is given by:

[Formula]

Logarithms are taken of the series persumed to exhibit growth, that is, all but
unemployment. The general expectations of the variables and their behaviors
are that unemployment and the tax wedge will decrease the wage, while produc-
tivity and inflation should increase the wage. The reasoning behind this is that
higher employment and greater tax wedge should lower the wages, whilst higher
productivity and inflation is thought to increase the wages. The coefficients are
expected to: 

[Formula]

    The main question is whether the general expectations of the variables and
their relationships to the real wage can be proven correct, or if there are some
differences between general expectations and the data estimations. The other
question I will try to answer is that if there are differences between data es-
timations and general expectations, why it is so and are there some general
explanations to this.
    The main focus in this case is Finland and the data used is quarterly data
between 1975 and 2007. The OECD database and ETLA are the main sources
for the data used in the estimation of the wage equation.
    The remainder of this paper is divided into 5 sections. Section 2 describes
the data used in this study. Section 3 describes the unit root and stationarity
tests, while section 4 looks at cointegration and the error correction model. The
final section consists of a discussion conserning the results.


2     The Data
The data used to estimate the wage equation is Finnish quarterly data from the
time period 1975-2007. The data is gathered from the OECD's database, from
"OECD Economic Outlook Data", "Main Economic Indicators" and "National
Accounts Data", and from ETLA's "Kotimaiset Aineistot" -database.
    Before doing a OLS regression and studying stationarity the series used are
presented graphically. By this the possible trends and breaks will hopefully be
identified so that one can improve the model if needed.
    In the first figure 1 the individual series are plotted against time. From all
series except for unemployment, there can be seen a trend of growth over time.
From the graphs one can also see a very clear break in the series in the beginning
of 1990's. This break is very visible in unemployment and total employment,
but one can also see a shift in the gross domestic product. The reason for this
break is obviously the early 1990's economic depression.


[Figure]
                                          5
    The second figure 2 is showing graphs where the combined series are plot-
ted against time. From these one can also clearly see the impact of the 1990's
depression.

[Figure]

3       Unit Root and Stationarity Tests
The important thing before estimating the wage equation in itself, is to test
the series, included in the equation, for stationarity. Stationarity implies often
stability and that the series converges to an equilibrium. From this one can
say that if non-stationarity is found then making economic translation becomes
meaningless. Thus controlling for stationarity is a necessity before performing
a time series analysis.

   The stationarity and its "strength" is much dependent of the time series
mean and auto-covariance and how it relates to t. It can be said that a time
series is weakly stationary if the mean and auto-covariance are not dependent
of t and if there is no change in the stationarity over time. It can be concluded
that a series is stationary and will be integrated of order 0, I(0), and a series
is integrated of order d, I(d), if the d :th difference is I(0) [Engle and Granger
(1987)].
   One way to analyze the stationarity process is by using unit root processing,
which is the one used in this term paper. One simple example of the unit root
process is the random walk:  

[Formula]

with the mean zero. The random walk is I(1), which implies that the first
difference  

[Formula] 

[Hendry (1986)].
   The conclusions that can be drawn from a unit root test is that if there exists
a unit root the process is non-stationary. One way of testing this is by using
a Dickey-Fuller test, where the model is rewritten to  

[Formula]

 Another variant of the
model with a more general lag structure is the Augmented Dickey-Fuller test
(ADF-test) and it is used as follows:

         [Formula]

3.1    ADF-test of the Individual Time Series
Economic time series are at their most I(2), which implies that their second
difference must be I(0), which instead implies a stationary process. Thus if the
first differences are I(0) the series would be I(1). If there exists a unit root and
the first difference is I(1) the series in itself is I(2). From this it becomes clear
that the first step is to test whether the individual series are I(1) or I(2).

The first differences of the individual time series are tested using the ADF-
test under the null hypothesis "there exists a unit root" and the results are
given on the left part of the table 1. If the null hypothesis cannot be rejected,
it is assumed that the series are I(2). If the null hypothesis can be rejected,
the stationarity levels needs to be tested. If that null hypothesis cannot be
rejected the variables are assumed to be I(0) and stationary. These results are
given on the right side of the table 1.

[Table]

   The t-value has been chosen as the lag length with least information loss
according to the Akaike criteria.
   The test show that unemployment and producer price index would not be
I(2). For the other variables the null hypothesis cannott be rejected which would
mean that they would be I(2).
   The level of unemployment and producer price index were tested by adding
a trend, since there is a reason to expect linear growth in the measures, eg.
wages have a tendency of growing in a long-run. Tests indicates that both series
would be I(1).


3.2    ADF-test of the Combined Time Series
After testing the individual time series, the second step is to test the variables
which are relevant to the wage equation. In other words the real wage is ex-
plained by unemployment, productivity, tax wedge and inflation. Through this
paper following notation of these are used:

            real wage

            unemployment

            productivity

            tax wedge

            inflation

The series above are all constructed from individual time series. An important
thing to note is that if individual series of the same order are integrated, their
sum is most often of the same order or of a lower order. If again individual
series of different orders are integrated, the sum of them is of the higher order
[Engle and Granger (1987)].
   The tests done on the individual time series in section 3.1, indicates that
the time series would be integrated of different orders. Although due to the
possibility of a weak ADF-test, the problem is ignored for the following analysis.
    The combined variables are all tested in the same way as the individual se-
ries in the earlier section 3.1, using the null hypothesis "there exists a unit root".
On the left side of the table 2, the results of testing the differences are shown,
and on the right side the results of testing the levels are shown. Unemployment
was already tested in the earlier section and thus it is not tested here again.


[Table]

    The t-value has been chosen as the lag length with least information loss
according to the Akaike criteria.
    As a result of the tests the null hypothesis can be rejected for all differences,
but not for any of the levels, which implies that all series are I(1). From this
we can conclude that since  

[Formula]

 and is I(1) and when  is I(2), that
also  is I(2) even if the ADF-test could imply something different.



4     Co-integration and the Error Correction Model
The problems that occur when studying time series data is that the data fluc-
tuates and moves in and out from equilibrium. This becomes a problem when
in economic theory and models the interests rely on equilibrium relations, this
again indicates that ordinary time series' models becomes useless when we want
to translate it to economic theory. To overcome this problem a error correction
model is used, which allows the series to show short-run fluctuations while it
still on a long-run converges to a equilibrium. The condition that has to be
fulfilled when using error correction models is to use co-integrated time series
in the models [Engle and Granger (1987)].
    If a series are expected to co-integrate they have to individually be I(1) and
non-stationary, but the linear combination of them has to be I(0) and stationary.
An example of this is that there is a vector,  , of a time series that is I(1) and
the linear combination  , where  is a co-integrating vector, is stationary.
From this can then be said that the  [Formula] is the long-run equilibrium of the
time series. It can although be said that for the most t,  is not a equilibrium
and for this reason there is a equilibrium error  [Formula], which should be
minimized in the models [Engle and Granger (1987)].
   Since it is already clear from section 3 that all the time series that are inter-
esting for the wage equation study, are all I(1), the next step, before formulating
the error correction model, is to study co-integration. For doing this here the
static long-run solution model is used.


4.1    Lag Length and Misspecification Tests
The first step is to specify the right model and then to find the right lag length
that should be used. The model used is the same as presented in the introduction
in section 1 and the relationship between the relevant variables is presented in
section 3.2, from this we get the following relevant relationship (corrected for
seasonality and including lags):

                    [Formula]

   The lag length that should be used is determined by doing a F-test using six
lags as a beginning point. (The model used is also corrected for seasonality.)
These results are shown in table 3, where on the left side each lag's significance
is tested under the null hypothesis is "the lag tested is significant". On the right
side of the table it is shown whether the models with fewer lags is a part of the
general model, under the null hypothesis is "the model is a part of the general
model".

[Table]

   From the test where each lag is separately tested, it is shown that only the
first lag is significant, but the second test on the right side shows that there
might be significances in the second and third lag. Since this, three lags are
included in the model.
   The next step is to re-estimate the test by only using three lags and af-
ter that the misspecification is tested.        This test gives measures for auto-
correlation, auto-regressive conditional heteroscedasticity (ARCH), normality
and heteroscedasticity, under the null hypothesis is "there is no misspecifica-
tion". Results are shown above in table 4.

[Table]

   From the results it can be seen that none of the tests' null hypothesis can
be rejected, which implies that the model is correctly formulated and that no
misspecification occurs when using only three lags. This will then give us the
following model:

[Formula]


4.2    Co-integration Test
As the correct model is determined, the following step is to control for possible
co-integration. This is done by using the static long-run solution. If the model
for the equilibrium model (ECM) is stationary, then the series are co-integrated.
The stationarity is determined with the ADF-test, where the null hypothesis is
"there exists a unit root".

[Table]

   The t-value has been chosen as the lag length with least information loss
according to the Akaike criteria.
   The test indicates that the null hypothesis can be rejected even on a 1 %
significance level, which means that the equilibrium model is stationary and
that the time series are cointegrated.


4.3    The Error Correction Model
From all the tests done in the earlier sections the following and last step is to
estimate the final error correction model. With the help of the model estimated
in section 4.1 the model can be formulated as following:

[Formula]

This model is then estimated a few times, so that every time it is
re-estimated, less significant lags are removed [Flaig and Steiner (1989)]. These
removals are then tested with a F-test to assure that the new models are still
a part of the general model. The final variables of the final error correction
model, except for seasonal corrections, are shown in table 6.

[Table]

    The final error correction model is then, as the final step, tested for misspec-
ification as in section 4.1, with the null hypothesis "there is no misspecification".
These test results are shown in table 7.

[Table]

    The results of the test shows that the null hypothesis cannnot be rejected
for any of the tests. By this one can conclude that the final error correction
model is valid and the model seems to be correctly stated.


5     Discussion
The equilibrium error coefficient in the error correction model, describes how
quickly the equilibrium error will adjust to the steady state. The tests indicate
that 4,7 percent of the actual value and the equilibrium level is corrected quar-
terly. In the model the equilibrium error explains the long-run deviation, when
the other variables explain the short-run dynamics.
   The static equilibrium long-run solution becomes the following:

[Formula]

   All coefficients are significant, but the most statistically significant varibles
are the differentiated inflation and production, which both are significant even
on a 1 % level. Another significant variable is the differentiated unemployment
(second lag), on a 5 % level. From the equation it can also be concluded that
unemployment and tax wedge have both negative signs, which is expected since
higher employment and greater tax wedge should lower the real wage in the
end. It is also expected that productivity has a positive sign, since increased
productivity should also increase the wages. The only thing in the model that
is opposite from what was thought, is that in this model the inflation should
affect the real wage negatively. These inflation effects have been studied closely
and many have tried to explain why the models have poor forecast performance,
and that is a reason for why thses models can't be taken as a "true" fact [James
E. H. Davidson and Yeo (1978)].
