1 Introduction
1.1 Research question and scope

The system of licensing music in the Nordic countries is quite developed and is working fairy well. However, the digital era has brought a lot of changes to the Nordic legal systems and has also affected the licensing of music – mostly because many new kinds of digital music services have developed. The digital era has enabled consumers to access music easily, rapidly and at a low cost, but it has also brought some negative aspects such as Internet piracy. In order for legal music services to be able to compete on the market with these pirate services, it is important that it is easy and cost-efficient to obtain the necessary rights from rights holders for the service to be legal.

There are several proposals on how to make licensing of music more efficient and especially in the U.S. several scholars and expert have looked into this. Two of them are Marybeth Peters and Bennett Lincoff. They have each come up with an idea on how to change the licensing system in the U.S. in order reduce the lengthy licensing negotiations and cut costs. In this term paper these two ideas will be examined more thoroughly and focus will be on whether they could be applied in the Nordic licensing system and whether they would actually contribute with a more effective approach to licensing or not. These ideas will be discussed in chapter X and the conclusions drawn from the discussion will be presented in chapter X. Before that, however, it is important to take a closer look at how the licensing system currently works in the Nordic countries, what rights need to be licensed, is there a working collective administration system and so on. These aspects will be dealt with in chapter X.

There are many different types of digital music services and the licenses needed and the licensing procedure differs a bit depending on the service. It would be too extensive to cover all possible services and look at the licensing connected to all of them and therefore this term paper will focus on one kind of services only: on-demand music streaming services. These services only offer streaming transmissions, meaning the user will not receive a copy of the song, and they are interactive, meaning the user can select the music he wants to listen to himself “upon demand”. 

1.2 Method

The method used in this term paper is legal dogmatics. Legal dogmatics is the oldest and most important method within legal science and is used to interpret and systematize the rules of law. The goal of legal dogmatics is to establish what the current rules of law are (de lege lata), or what they should be (de lege ferenda), and to specify how these rules should be interpreted and applied. The interpretation of law will in this term paper be of great importance when determining the rights holders’ rights that are to be licensed to the services. By also systemizing the rules of law, in other words structuring the current law, legal dogmatics strives towards creating and developing a system of legal concepts that the interpretation of law hinges on. Systematization is also important for obtaining a general view of the legal system.

2 Rights and licenses
2.1 Necessary rights

It is the person who creates a literary or artistic work who has copyright therein. The work may consist of a piece of writing or a speech, a musical or dramatic work etc. In other words, a song, for example, can be a piece of work protected by copyright, and it may have several separate copyright owners, as the lyrics and the music might have been created by different authors. The Nordic countries all have quite similar copyright acts because they have been written in close collaboration.  

Before discussing the rights of rights holders it is important to take a look at why these rights are needed for the music service to be legal. When streaming music on-demand from a service on the Internet, there are essentially two aspects that are legally interesting to copyright holders and the music industry. First of all the result of streaming is that the song is played audibly, communicated, and this will implicate certain rights of right holders. Secondly, there are different kinds of copying of the song taking place in the process. A copy of the song is put on the server of the service provider so that the users can stream it from there. Furthermore, during the streaming transmission of the song, the user’s receiving computer temporarily stores, “buffers”, parts of the recording in random access memory, RAM, before it is made audible in order to secure that the song can be performed without interruptions caused by a slow network. When the recording is played, the temporary buffer copies are removed part by part as they are played and are replaced with the following part. The streaming software may also temporarily cache the received data on the user’s hard drive and the data will remain there until it is written over by other data. (might not be relevant because of section 11a FCA…..)

In the Finnish Copyright Act, FCA, section 2 it is stated that copyright provides an exclusive right to control a work by reproducing it or making it available to the public. Reproduction includes copies of the work made in whole or in part, directly and indirectly, temporarily or permanently. The reproduction can be made by any means and in any form, and also comprises the transfer of the work to another device, by which it can be reproduced or communicated. The main features of the reproduction right are thus technology neutrality and independence from time and quantity, meaning that the status of copyright of the copy made from the original is not bound by how durable it is or how, or of what material, it is made.

Furthermore, it is stated in section 2 FCA that a work is made available to the public when it is, for example, “communicated to the public by wire or wireless means, including communication in a way which enables members of the public to access the work from a place and at a time individually chosen by them”. This means that interactive communication is also part of the exclusive right of making a work available to the public. In the Swedish legal preparatory works it is specified that typical examples of this latter situation are webpages where a selection of musical works are made available to the public to listen to. This provision on communication covers all distance transmissions, including all communications of works on the Internet, and also every possible as yet unknown technique of transfer. (maybe bring up 11a FCA in this context as well).

It has already been established who has the rights to the musical works, but if the musical work is recorded there are additional rights involved. Related rights, also called neighbouring rights, are not copyrights but rights closely related to them. There are several groups of producers and artists whose rights are protected through this scheme, two of which are performing artists and producers of phonograms. When it comes to the right to dispositions, holders of related rights are today in quite a similar position as copyright holders. According to section 46 FCA, a phonogram cannot without the consent of the producer be transferred on to a device by means through which it can be reproduced nor can it be communicated to the public by wire or wireless means, including communication to the public in a manner which enables members of the public to access the work from a place, and at a time, individually chosen by them.

2.2 Necessary licenses

The provider of an on-demand music streaming service must obtain two kinds of licenses for both the musical works and the phonogram; a reproduction license and a license for making the works available to the public and the same kinds of licenses for the phonograms, the recordings of the works. The view in the Nordic countries, and in Europe generally, is that the music streaming service is the party requiring the licenses, and not the consumer. Therefore, although the consumers will not get a copy of the work/phonogram through streaming, the service must still obtain a reproduction license as the work/phonogram is reproduced when put on the service provider’s server, from where the users then stream the works. Besides the copy put on the server of the service-provider, temporary buffer copies also emerge as a result of the streaming process. In the Nordic countries, copies that emerge due to a technical process and that don’t have any individual economic value are regarded as exemptions from the rights holders’ reproduction rights in accordance with section 11a FCA. Therefore, no licenses are required for these copies. (might not mention this part as it is technically of no importance for the licensing)

Licenses for making works available to the public are necessary for the making available of the works/phonograms to the public, which encompasses interactive transmissions. Hereinafter, a shorter term, “performance licenses”, will be used when referring to licenses for making works available to the public as this is the term commonly used.  

3 Collective administration of rights
3.1 The organizations

In theory, in order to get its business working, a music service would have to make individual licensing agreements with all rights holders for each and every musical work and phonogram. These separate negotiations would be very time-consuming and expensive indeed, and it would be practically impossible to set up a service of any kind. In practise, this is not the case as many rights holders have transferred their rights to other entities who administer them collectively.

The Nordic countries have in the past worked, and are still working, closely together when it comes to copyright, and as a result the Nordic copyright laws resemble each other a great deal. The Nordic collaboration goes beyond the legislative level and is also found in the collective administration of rights. For musical works, each Nordic country has its own collective administration organization for issuing performance licenses; in Finland it is TEOSTO, in Sweden STIM, in Norway TONO and in Denmark KODA. The organizations strive for that anyone should be allowed non-exclusive use of the works that they represent, as long as they pay. These organizations represent music authors and publishers, and all of these organizations are authorized to handle performance licenses for digital use such as streaming. The streaming services are seen as any other user of music, and therefore, the collective administration organizations are able to enter into licensing agreements with them after negotiating the terms of the agreement. The negotiations may take a bit longer than with “traditional” users, since Internet services often represent new kinds of business models on the market and the organizations need to analyze what the service is really offering, what it will cost and so on.

The reproduction licenses, on the other hand, are issued by a common organization called NCB, Nordic Copyright Bureau, who holds the authority to issue reproduction licenses covering all the Nordic countries and also the Baltic States – Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. NCB is also authorized to license music for Internet use, such as on-demand streaming. In order to simplify the licensing procedure even further in the Nordic countries, NCB works closely together with the performing rights organizations, and in practice the rights holders grant NCB the use of their reproduction rights through their membership to the performing organizations. Together the organizations offer a joint license for users who want to offer on-demand streaming of music on the Internet. If the area the music provider is interested in is, for example, Finland, both reproduction and performance licenses can be obtained by contacting TEOSTO. 

The collective administration of related rights is managed by organizations other than those administrating the rights of the musical works. In Finland and Denmark the organization is GRAMEX, in Sweden the Swedish Group of IFPI and in Norway GRAMO. These organizations look after the rights that producers are given by law, but when it comes to licensing of on-demand music services, the situation is a bit different. GRAMEX in Finland license some kinds of on-demand streaming services; for example, they license the phonograms included in programs put on the Yle Areena, but when it comes to licensing of services that could be compared to, or even replace, record sales, record companies handle it themselves. These services include both online music shops and music streaming services. The situation is the same in all Nordic countries. 

3.2 The extended collective license

In the Nordic countries, legislators have focused especially on the position and legal security of users and have developed a technique called “extended collective licensing” in order to resolve the contradiction between copyright exclusivity and mass-use. The extended collective license is an intermediary form between voluntary and compulsory licensing. It is governed by law, and both general and specific rules are found in the Nordic copyright acts. The provisions on the extended collective license also apply to related rights to an extensive extent. The extended collective license has proved to be very useful in mass-use situations, but it is important that it is only used when there is a strong and non-disputable need for it, as it contains a compulsory element. This is also the reason for why it is very important that it has legal support by explicit provisions in the law. The institution of an extended collective license builds on the idea that rights holders could seldom, in mass-use situations, get the maximum benefits from their exclusive rights by negotiating alone – it is better if a collective administration organization negotiates freely on behalf of all rights holders. The negotiated contract is then legally binding on all rights holders, also on the ones that are not represented by the organization, and it constitutes a fully covering license. The user, by its contract with the collective administration organization, will easily receive all necessary rights needed for its activity at the same time as all rights holders are receiving fair compensation. These kinds of general contracts, also involving non-represented authors, are characteristic for the extended collective license system, but would not be possible without the provisions in the law. It is possible for the non-represented to decline their right, but the benefits offered through this system are considerable, and therefore resignations are quite rare. The extended collective license gives users the right to legally use all material in the field and the rights holders in turn have the right to individual remuneration.

A condition for letting a collective administration organization act upon this system is that it is representative in its field, meaning that a considerable number of rights holders must be represented by it. This derives from the idea that, in that situation, it is unlikely that a rights holder acting alone could obtain a better contract. Additional conditions are also possible; in Finland, for example, the organization must be approved by the Ministry of Education.

The extended license exists in all Nordic countries with the same basic structure. The system was first adopted to cover the field of broadcasting of literary and musical works, but has now extended to other areas such as off-air recording of radio and television programs for educational use, use of works in broadcasting companies’ archives etc. Some Nordic countries have also introduced a general provision on extended collective licensing in their copyright acts and others are considering it [] find more info on this!

4 MROs and a Digital Transmission right
4.1 A digital transmission rights

Write this section based on articles from Bennett Lincoff and possibly get some material from Teosto / ipr info journal….
Basic ideas: create one right for digital use and let the collective administration organization license it
Only digital use
Could maybe be achieved with contracts as well?

4.2 MROs

Write this section based on Marybeth Peters’ statement to the subcommittee on courts (found online). 
Basic idea: let collective administration organizations license both reproduction and performance licenses
Is this necessary when NCB is collaborating so closely with the other Nordic organizations?

5 Conclusions

Base conclusions on findings in chapter 4….
Discuss whether the ideas are working
Is the Nordic system in need of a change?
Would the ideas change anything in practice in the Nordic countries?
Which of the ideas is better?


