CSR and Human Resource Management
- is there a connection?

Introduction 
Corporate Social responsibility (CSR) is an issue that is becoming more and more important for companies. According to Schaefer (2008) top management in companies should be well aware of the social responsibility and how the company image is seen by others. While companies try to keep their own business in order, they also need to take into account what the public expect from the company as well as the shareholders expectations (Zadek 2004). There have also been arguments concerning CSR, and according to Friedman (1970) the only social responsibility that firms have is to increase its profit. It has been argued that a business is not a person and therefore it cannot have any responsibilities (Friedman, 1970). On the other hand, research has shown that the public’s view of a company can be very vital, so if a company doesn’t take into account their social responsibility, there can be serious damages to the company’s image (Zadek 2004). It can be stated that CSR is an issue that businesses tend to think about a lot these days, but who’s leading this issue inside an organization? According to Adrienne Fox (2008) there is often no clear department that takes care if this matter and often it falls upon the marketing department. What she suggests is that the HR department would take its chance and take this issue as their responsibility. Often it doesn’t work out this way but she argues that the HR department does have the qualities and the knowledge of the organizations procedures to take on this kind of task. The HR department often collaborates and discusses with every department in an organization and this is something that CSR needs in order for it to work. (Fox 2008)
This paper looks further into the connections between CSR and different human resource (HR) strategies. The purpose of the paper is to get a deeper understanding of the connection between these two and to see if and why HR can be responsible for CSR strategies. The rest of the paper is divided into three sections. The first section is a literature review of both CSR and HR strategies. In this section the connection between CSR and HRM will also be discussed. The second section is an analysis of the literature review and the final section will include the conclusion
Literature review
In this section the theories regarding both CSR and HR will be discussed. The latter part of this will discuss how CSR and HR can work together and if it is possible to implement CSR strategies into the HR functions. 
Corporate Social Responsibility
CSR is a strategy that organizations can implement in order to be add value to the organization. CSR takes into account society, environment and the organization. One of the reasons for organizations to take on this strategy is to build on a strong company brand. Another reason for implementing CSR into the organizational strategy is to differentiate the organization from other organizations and therefore build a competitive advantage towards other organizations (Hillestad, Xie and Haugland, 2010). When talking about CSR many authors mention the triple bottom line trend. The triple bottom line concerns the society, the environment and the organization, as already mentioned above. Organizations can choose to follow this trend in many ways, there is not only one way to be socially responsible. (Mees and Bonham 2004) While many authors emphasize the importance and value of being socially responsible there has also been arguments about whether an organization is obliged to act socially responsible or not. Milton Friedman (1970) argues that the only responsibility an organization has is to increase its profit. According to Friedman a corporate executive is hired by the owners of the corporate and is expected to act in the way that the stockholders want him to do. He does not think that an organization should take on CSR strategies unless the stockholders explicitly whishes to do so (Friedman, 1970). Alan D. Smith (2007) recognizes this theory in his article “Making the case for the competitive advantage of corporate social responsibility”, but also argues that the stockholders aren’t the only ones who shares an interest in the firms’ actions. Smith argues that taking into consideration both the environment and the people in it are factors that a company are obligated to think about. He also points out that being socially responsible can lead to gaining a competitive advantage towards other organizations. (Smith 2007) the triple bottom line concept also indicates that it is not the stockholders opinion that matter; it is instead the stakeholder’s opinion. An organization has a responsibility towards the stakeholder and the stakeholders in this sense are anyone who is affected by the organization. (Glade 2008)
Simon Zadek (2004) identifies five stages that an organization goes through when a new demand is set upon them, for example a demand like being socially responsible. The first stage is being defensive, thinking that it is not our responsibility. The second stage is compliance. This is the stage when the organization realizes that they have to do something about the critic they are given and defend their reputation. What follows after this is the managerial stage, when the organization recognizes that this is an issue that will last over time. A short term strategy to defend the reputation will not work anymore and they have to come up with a strategy that will last. At this point it is time for the strategic stage. The strategic stage is the stage when the organization realizes that having a CSR strategy can be useful in the competition with other organizations. The final stage is the civil stage, where the organization has already built up a CSR strategy and now wants to show the society how much they engage in this matter. (Zadek 2004)
How do organizations then build these CSR strategies? According to Jeremy Galbreath (2008) there are many organizations that don’t have a proper strategy for CSR. The effort that is being made to act socially responsible often includes reporting about ethics and creating public relations campaigns. Galbreath points out that an organization’s mission is where the CSR strategy has its beginning. The mission of an organization tells us what they want to accomplish with their activities and what they want to promote. The organization should build the CSR strategy on this mission and remember what the original goal of the organization is. For the CSR strategy to work there has to be an understanding of the environment outside the organization as well. Another aspect that is good to have in mind when building up CSR strategies is the market. An analysis of the market and of potential buyers is vital if there is a specific characteristic of the specific market. A specific market can have demands on how the business should be conducted, for example demand regarding social responsibility. The same strategy can be applied when it comes to customer needs. Resources are another issue that should be integrated into the CSR strategy. Resource utilization is something that an organization can benefit from. The benefits will occur if the organization can find a specific resource that can give them an advantage that other companies doesn’t have. The resource utilization also has to do with the last part of building up the CSR strategy, which is creating a competitive advantage. An organization can gain competitive advantage by having a resource that is rare and that gives value. This resource also has to be hard to imitate by other organizations. 
Human Resource Management
Human resource management (HRM) is a term that has been debated over time. According to Bratton and Gold (2003) HRM can be seen as managing employees and their relations to achieve competitive advantage. They see employees inside a company as a valuable resource and also believe that these employees are the ones that bring the organizational value to the company. (Bratton and Gold 2003) Many HR practices are built on the organizational culture. The HR practices then influence individual behavior inside an organization as the practices themselves are based on the culture. (Bowen and Ostroff 2004) The HR department has also been recognized as an important factor when it comes to organizational change. The HR managers are the ones that, when a change is occurring, should lead the individuals towards the transition. As technical processes are easy to learn, it can be harder to understand the new mindset that has to be approached when an organizational change is occurring. The HR manager’s role is not to decide what needs to be changed but instead how the employees will make the change happen. (Court 2011)
CSR and HRM
While there has been many articles written about CSR there has been little written about whose role it is, inside an organization, to take actions on this matter. This section will discuss the connection between CSR and HRM in order to see if the HR department inside an organization can be in charge for CSR matters. Adrianne Fox (2007) noted that the HR department could be a perfect component in bringing in CSR strategies to an organization. According to Fox it is only a matter of time before HR recognizes the fact that CSR can be a part of their work task, and when they do so the results will be good. The HR department is perfect for this role as they already know the operational functions of an organization and are able to tie them to the business. (Fox, 2007) According to Lam and Khare (2010) there are several reasons why the HR department in an organization would take on the responsibility of implementing the CSR strategies. The first reason would be that the HR department is known for establishing and keeping up the organizational values. The social responsibility of a firm is directly linked to the organizational values of a firm. Secondly, CSR principles concerns issues like human rights and justice among people, and HR people are trained and well aware of how employees should be treated in an organization. (Lame and Khare 2010) Furthermore, the CSR strategies should start from inside the company. The employees are the ones that communicate to the outside world and they indirectly reflect the company culture and values. The HR department is often responsible of keeping up this culture and they are also the ones who can make a change in the behavior of the organization and mostly, make a change in the behavior of the employees. (Galbreath 2008)
Sukserm and Takahashi (2010) also recognize the HR department as an actor when it comes to implementing CSR strategies. They believe that the components that drive CSR are the employees in the organization. This argument enhances the argument that HR workers should play a part in leading the CSR strategies. If the HR department would take the lead in organizing the CSR strategies the employees would have a chance of learning about ethical behavior. The benefits that would arise from these strategies would, so to say, not only have an impact on the society but also on the organization itself. (Sukserm and Takahashi 2010) If the public relations department is responsible for CSR strategies, the result might be that the image of the company or the brand will be in the spotlight. This can be a positive topic but it may also result in the way that nothing actually gets done. The CSR matters might just be a facade to the outer world but no actions are actually taken. Another department that could be in charge for the CSR strategies is the legal department. By having the legal department taking care of CSR matters the organization can be sure that they will minimize any potential risks within the company. The concern with this though, is that the legal department might concentrate solely on minimizing the risks which would mean that creative ideas could get left behind. (Mees and Bonham 2004) Having two different organizational identities can, at the end, be very damaging to a company. Organizational identities in this context means the identity the organization shows to the public and the one for the business. (Ledwidge 2007)The HR department on the other hand, has a unique position in an organization and is therefore a good candidate to take care of CSR matters. (Mees and Bonham 2004) 
If the HR department is the one in charge for CSR, it is important for them to learn how the employees, the customers and the organization itself will be affected when establishing CSR strategies.  When they decide on the CSR strategy the HR department is the one that has to extend this strategy over the whole organization. The employees or actually the whole organization must agree on the beliefs and values of the CSR strategy. (Ledwidge 2007)Brian Glade (2008) found that this was one way for the HR department to build up the strategies in his study. He found that building CRS strategies into the organizational mission was a way to incorporate CSR strategies into the organizational culture. He also found that another mayor applicator of CSR strategies was the public relations department. (Glade 2008)
Analysis
In the beginning of this paper the importance of CSR was discussed. It can be concluded that CSR is something that organizations nowadays are implementing to their business strategy as there are many more opinions to take into consideration. The different reasons for implementing CSR strategies were to improve the company image, to build up a stronger brand and to add value to the company. The problems that can occur with these strategies are that they aren’t taken seriously and the organization is just trying to fool the rest of the world by saying that they are acting socially responsible. The benefit that an organization can gain by being socially responsible comes when they recognize that CSR is a long-term investment and that they actually can gain something positive from implementing these strategies. One of the arguments about creating CSR strategies pointed out that the strategy comes from the mission of the company, it is there the concept begins. Another concept that is influenced on the values and mission of the company is the HR function. The HR department is a department that not only comes from the core values of the company but actually has a capability of teaching these values to other employees. 
As many authors have argued HR can be, and would be, a good candidate for taking on the responsibility of CSR. The public relations department is another candidate that has been brought up but there have been some doubts about this too. The concern is that if the public relations department takes on this responsibility, the CSR strategies might just remain as an idea and nothing will actually get done. The main arguments that have been stated for why HR would be such a good candidate for managing CSR is that both functions are based on organizational values. As already stated the CSR values should start from inside the company and build on the mission of the organization. The HR department has an advantage here as they are the ones who can affect the behavior of employees in an organization. 
Conclusion
The purpose of this paper was to get a deeper understanding of the connection between HR and CSR and to see if HR could be in charge of this matter. As a conclusion it can be said that there are many different motives why HR in fact could be in charge of CSR. The connections between the two areas are clear and there are a lot of implications that states that HR could take on this responsibility. There is still room for future research about how the HR department in practice would follow through with this role could be an interesting subject. 
