Business Models

1. Introduction
The rapidly increased customer power has put firms into a completely new situation. They need to respond to the evolving needs of customers at an increasing pace. This requires strategic agility and business models, which are ready for continuous innovation and change. The ability to design agile but sustainable business models, which fit the firm and answer to customers’ needs, is quickly becoming the most critical competitive advantage a firm holds.

1.1 Research gap
This paper participates in the strategic marketing discussion regarding business models. Business model as a concept has a fairly short history in its current form and has not received widespread attention in marketing literature yet. Despite this, business models have very quickly emerged to management vocabulary and become one of the hottest topics among practitioners. Recent literature suggests that business models can have an important role in corporate management, and effective business models are seen as one key success factor for firms in the future. (Shafer, Smith & Linder, 2005) According to Osterwalder’s(2009) vision firms will increasingly enter into networked operations in the future, and business models will become the boundaries of competition. However, while it is quite fashionable to discuss business models, there is still much confusion about what business models are and how they can be used (Shafer et al. 2005).

With the increased attention from management, also academia has taken more interest towards business models recently. The change of decade saw a dramatic increase in the amount of published articles regarding business models. An academic journal Long Range Planning published a special issue on business models in spring 2010 and more articles on the subject are published with an increased frequency in various academic journals. Majority of the articles are however conceptual in nature, and there are very few researchers who have showed empirical evidence on the efficiency of using business models as a tool for management. Only two studies were identified, whichdiscussed business model elements in empirical context. However, the concentration on these was to identify firm level business models rather than identify the elements within the organization. Therefore there is a clear research gap in the empirical evidence of the functioning of business model.

1.2 Research problem
Despite the recent increase of interest, business model as a construct is still rather unexplored and lacks a unified definition and proper taxonomical criteria. Therefore the purpose of this paper is toserve as an exploratory study to the subject, by trying to merge existing knowledge and identify common threads from different academic papers to form a unified understanding of the topic. The paper aims at describing what a business model is, identifying the design elements of an effective business model, and illustrating how to manage business model(s).Furthermore, empirical evidence from a case organization will be used to illustrate current situation within a firm.

1.3 Structure of the paper
The paper is divided into five main sections: (1) Background and definition, (2) contents,  (3) management, (4) empirical evidence from a case organization, and (5) conclusions and implications. After the introduction, the background chapter builds a ground for the study by briefly going through the history of business models as a concept, followed with definitions. Then the contents of an effective business model are discussed, the role of business model in an organization is discussed, and the management of business models is touched upon. After building a solid theoretical understanding of the topic the previously discussed issues are compared to the empirical reality within a case organization. Finally, conclusions are drawn and implications for managers and practitioners made. 

2. Background of business models
The term “business model” has its origins in year 1957 when it was first time used in an academic paper (Osterwalder et al. 2005). The term started gaining wider popularity from late 1990’s onwards when the concept was discussed mainly in Internet context (Osterwalder, Pigneur&Tucci,2005). A few years after the increased fame, several researchers noticedthat despite its popularity the business model construct was theoretically vague, and lacked a proper definition. (E.g. Tikkanen, Lamberg, Parvinen&Kallunki, 2005; Osterwalder, 2004; Osterwalder et al. 2005) Therefore, during the past ten years researchers have done extensive literature reviews and compared various business model definitions in order to merge the existing knowledge to form a holding conceptual framework of the construct. (E.g. Osterwalder 2004; Tikkanen et al., 2005; Nenonen&Storbacka, 2010)   

However, despite these attempts there are still no commonly agreed conceptual definition, scientific taxonomical criteria or framework for business models (Nenonen&Storbacka, 2010). Researchers still criticize the poor conceptualization, and it seems that work in the field is anything but over yet. Despite this, some researchers have already reached beyond the conceptualization stage in an attempt to form a design framework of business model construction elements. (For example Osterwalder 2004; Storbacka, 2009; Nenonen&Storbacka, 2010; Teece, 2010) However, due to the lack of a unified definition, also the frameworks differ in their contents rather much. Therefore there is a clear need to research these issues further in order to narrow down the variety and to form a mutual understanding. 

2.1. Defining the business model concept
Joan Magretta wrote a seminal article on business models in 2002 in Harvard Business Review where she aimed at making a simple, working definition of the concept. She concluded that business models are stories, which explain how enterprises work. On same vein, Osterwalder (2004) talks about the importance of clear communication between different business operations to create a shared and common understanding of what a company does. Furthermore, Osterwalder (2004) points out that business models facilitate communication between people by acting as a common language between stakeholders so that they are able to formulate ideas in a way that everybody understands. Similarly Storbacka (2009:26) sees business models as important communication vehicles in organizations – they help individuals to understand the firm’s business logic. Business models could thus be described as a common language, which helps to align the views of different business functions in order to optimize the business performance (Magretta, 2002). This view is emphasized in these definitions:

“A business model is a conceptual tool that contains a set of elements and their relationships and allows expressing the business logic of a specific firm. It is a description of the value a company offers to one or several segments of customers and of the architecture of the firm and its network of partners for creating, marketing, and delivering this value and relationship capital, to generate profitable and sustainable revenue streams.”
Osterwalder et al. (2005:10)

“We define a business model as a representation of a firm’s underlying core logic and strategic choices for creating and capturing value within a value network. “
Shafer et al. (2005:202)

For the purpose of this paper, and drawing from the above-mentioned definitions, business model is here defined as the operations logic of how an organization and its functions are arranged in order to meet the targets set by strategy and vision.In order to understand how business model functions in enabling the realization of a set strategy it is necessary to understand its relationships to other business functions. Additionally it is important to clarify howbusiness models are constructed, andthe roles and management of effective models. The following chapters bite into these aspects. 

2.   Locus and contents of business model
This chapter explains the location of a business model related to other functions within a firm as well as discusses the design elements, in other words contents, of an effective business model. 

2.1 Locus of business model
The lack of consensus within the academia regarding business models may be a result of an interest in the concept from a wide range of disciplines, which all have found a connection to the term (Shafer et al. 2005). Business model touches all areas of business and thus it is sometimes difficult to locate its exact position and role. One of the most difficult things seems to be to distinguish it from other business practices (Osterwalder, 2004). 

The definition and role of business model is closely related to strategy, and therefore often confused with it. Wikström, Artto, Kujala&Söderlund(2010) conclude that while strategy emphasizes competition, business models are built more on value creation for customers.  Business models provide a link between operations and strategy and therefore, even though it is important to distinguish them from each other, they still need to be integrated into both value creation and strategy processes, and aligned with other business structures and operations. (Mäkinen&Seppänen, 2007; Wikström et al., 2010) 

Osterwalder (2004) clarifies that while strategy, business models, and process models all address similar problems, they do it in different layers. Figure 1 shows the different business layers and the relationship of them to each other. 

[Figure]

A firm’s strategy belongs to the planning level, while business model is a blueprint of how strategy is brought into action in an organization, and implementation is done on the third process layer (Osterwalder, 2004). Similarly, Tikkanen et al. (2005) conclude that strategy gives meaning and direction to business model design. Teece (2010) clarifies the relationship further by describing strategy creation as a more “granular” exercise, while business model design requires more fine-tuning such as segmenting customers, creating value propositions and organizing operations. Additionally, Teece (2010) explains business models as being more generic than strategy, and therefore more transparent to public than strategic choices. 

2.2 Contents of a business model
Several researchers have attempted to clarify the concept of business model through creating frameworks of design elements that the models consist of. Mäkinen and Seppänen (2007) point out that when receiving increased attention from the academics, business models have been approached from various perspectives and that has resulted in formulation of several alternative frameworks (E.g. Tikkanen et al., 2005; Storbacka, 2009; Teece, 2010;). People have different mental models and understand business models in different ways. Therefore the frameworks serve as necessary tools for sharing a common agreement of what elements are included in within the business models. (Osterwalder et al. 2005) 

Demil and Lecocq (2010) refer to business model design as the articulation between different business activities.  There is an abundance of various frameworks, but no agreement within the academia of the design elements of a superior business model (Casadesus-Masanell&Ricart, 2010). The various frameworks differ in their contents rather much. For example Shafer et al. (2005) found 42 different elements or building blocks that different authors mentioned as belonging to a business model.  However, Nenonen&Storbacka (2010) found out that there are five aspects that are present in most:

1) Explains how firm creates value for its customers
2) Shows how firm yields profits from its operations
3) Illuminates relationships within value network
4) Illustrates firm’s resources and capabilities
5) Explicates firm’s major strategic decisions

The academia is however coherent about the dynamic approach towards business models. The elements of business models are in constant interaction and change, and a shift in one element requires a change in the entire configuration. The design framework-approach allows firms to pro-actively innovate and design their business models and to simulate possibilities. It is also a viable exercise to visualize current business models and processes involved to it (Chesbrough, 2010). However, since actual business models are usually rather complex, researchers have been obliged to simplify the presentation (Casadesus-Masanell&Ricart 2010). The frameworks are nevertheless seen as important because they help to communicate the business model in a clear way. 

Quite pertinently Casadesus-Masanell&Ricart (2010) are of the opinion that business model design is closer to being art than a science. The frameworks have been constructed to help managers in the multifaceted task of designing and innovating business models. However, any model is only a simplification of the whole truth, and therefore cannot address all variables that the differentiated processes in firms require. Nevertheless, the ultimate aim of using any kind of framework is that after the modeling process, a firm should have all necessary aspects of business planned to be able to function effectively and meet the needs of customers.

3. Role and management of business models
This chapter explains the role of a business model in a firm as well as describes how an effective business model should be managed. 

3.1 Role of business model in a firm
Additionally to the academic debate regarding definitions, several researchers have notified that the business model concept is still fairly unknown and widely misunderstood among practitioners. (E.g. Osterwalder et al., 2005; Shafer et al., 2005;)Management has a hard time identifying their own business models and understanding the role of a business model: what does it do and how can it be used (Shafer et al., 2005). This chapter bites into this problem by reviewing the recent academic findings of the roles and uses of business models.

Despite controversies, all researchers seem to agree that the effective design and development of business models brings competitive advantage, and thus it should receive increased attention within business management practice. (E.g. Magretta, 2002; Nenonen&Storbacka, 2010)The paradox with business models is that they exist in all firms, but are not necessarily explicitly discussed as a separate construct. Rather, business model design or innovation can be part of a firm’s inherent practices, which are not given separate attention. Thus many companies do not have established practices for business model design, innovation or management. (Magretta, 2002) The latest literature on business models suggests that these invisible practices should be made visible in order to start managing them actively and thus increase competitive advantage. The idea is that once the concepts are made explicit firms can actually start actively design, innovate and develop practices involved in them. (Nenonen and Storbacka, 2010; Osterwalder, 2010) 

As described earlier in the definition context, business models as constructs allow for the sharing and understanding of the business logic of a firm. Additionally, an effective business model can help management in the observation, measurement, comparison, and analysis of current business practices as well as in the innovation and design of new, prospective business models. In other words, business models aid management by providing a clear structure through which operations can be monitored, analyzed and designed. This in turn allows for creation of sustainable business models, which are nevertheless apt for faster reactions to changes in the business environment. (Osterwalder, 2004) 

3.2 Management of business models
The previously discussed locus of business model and design frameworks are important to notify because a strategic realignment, which does not fit the business model components, is doomed to fail. (Tikkanen et al. 2005) Thus any change within strategy or business model needs attention to the other components as well. This chapter discusses the importance of managing the fit between business model design elements and other operations within the firm. 

Recent literature suggests that a firm can considerably improve value creation by business models that have a high degree of internal and external configurational fit (Nenonen&Storbacka, 2010). By this is meant the alignment of operations in three fronts. First, a business model must be fit to customers’ needs. This is the most critical success factor for any business model and in some firms might bring in the need for managing several, sometimes even conflicting business models. If the needs of business segments or customer portfolios are very different then it is viable to have separate business models to meet those needs. This is critical, because a business model has no use if it is not aligned according to the customers’ needs. 

Secondly, the company must ensure a fit between its internal operations – all the firm’s operations should be aligned so that processes run as smoothly and efficiently as possible. Additionally, the business model should be designed in a way that there is no risk for internal conflicts within the management and implementation of it. Third, a firm must ensure a fit between its business model and the external environment – including customers, partners and other stakeholders the firm interacts with. For the third requirement to fulfill, the two first should be first secured: external fit requires seamless interplay of internal operations. Especially customer relationship management operations are critical in meeting the customer’s expectations. (Explore, 2010:7)

The empirical findings of research by Nenonen and Storbacka (2010) showed that no business model design is superior per se. What matters most is the fit of the elements to each other, to the firm, and to customers. Thus they conclude that business models should be viewed as a combination of design elements, which are orchestrated by a single theme. The effectiveness of the model is defined by the internal and external fit of the elements. (Nenonen&Storbacka, 2010) 

4. Empirical evidence from a case organization
This chapter reflects the theoretical ground and the empirical evidence drawn from a case firm. 

5. Conclusions and implications
A conclusion of the discussion is that it is not important which framework is used or which design elements included within a business model, but the ability of the business model as a whole to capture the business logic and operations so as to maximize the value creation possibilities. In other words, the design elements and their emphasis, on the business model can vary considerably between firms. As mentioned earlier, the most critical feature of a functioning business model is the fit – the model must fit the focal organization and its ways of conducting business. This is in line with the argument from Demil&Lecocq (2010:243) where they state that a business model can only be said to be consistent when it leads to sustainable performance and profits.

A well-designed business model is difficult to copy by other firms, because it requires a perfect fit between all elements and operations. Therefore same business model does not suit several firms, because it requires adjustment to the current situation and organization.It can be concluded that a well-functioning business model, i.e. one that has a good fit between its elements allows a firm for better value creation by making offerings that are appealing to the customer and thus securing revenue streams. 

This chapter is finalized once the empirical research is done and conclusions and implications from can be drawn.  