The performance of Finnish technology IPOs during Information Technology Bubble

1.0 Introduction
As an investor you are always looking for a good investment opportunity. Investing in
an initial public offering in Finland is one possibility, but then perhaps you want some
more information about their performance in general. In recent years, there have been
many studies about initial public offerings and their performance, but not so many
particularly in Finland.

According to Ibbotson & Ritter (1995) IPOs have proven to be great investment
opportunities in the short run, but not as good in the long run. These are studies,
which have been made outside Finland. Now we need to further investigate if these
same patterns of good short run performance and poor long run performance also
occurs on the Finnish stock market. Most of the previous studies have investigated
every single one initial public offerings made on a certain stock exchange. I find that,
now it`s the time for concentrating on a specific area, and my idea is to investigate the
performance of Finnish technology IPOs during the Information Technology Bubble.
The question remains, will my upcoming research get the same results as the previous
ones?

There were fifteen technology companies that made an initial public offering during
years 1998 to 2002. These are also the companies which will be used in my research.
How will they perform? That is a question that hopefully will be answered at the end
of this paper.

This remainder of this paper is divided into seven sections. The first section contains
general information about initial public offerings, why companies want to go public,
and the advantages and the disadvantages of going public. The third and fourth
sections will contain the main theoretical framework and previous studies. After these
two sections, I will present the data, restrictions and my method for this research.
Section seven will consist of the results and the last section will conclude the whole
research.


1.1 Purpose

The purpose of this study is to investigate how Finnish technology IPOs have
performed on the Finnish market from year 2002 to 2012.

                                                                                       
1.2 Problem discussion

Previous studies (Ritter 1984) have shown evidence of initial underpricing. Meaning
that the IPO shares are sold to initial investors (usually large institutional investors) at
lower prices than they are later traded at on the stock market. Which in turn leads to a
concept called "money left on the table", i.e. the profits that the initial investor makes
by buying underpriced shares and later selling them on the stock market at a higher
price.

Because the shares are underpriced it means that on the first day the shares are traded
on the stock exchange the price will be driven up. The difference between the closing
price of the first day and the offer price is called the initial return. The issuing
company itself does not gain anything when money is left of the table; it is in fact
capital that they could have raised but failed to, due to the underpricing (Ritter 1986).
However, the underpricing is in most cases partially on purpose and the underlying
theories as to why they are underpriced will be more thoroughly discussed in chapter
three.

Another phenomena of IPOs is their long run underperformance. Extensive studies,
from Ritter (1991), Keloharju (1993), and Ljungqvist (1997) have shown that IPOs
tend to underperform their competitors within a time period of approximately 3-6
years after the initial public offering.

In the next section I will present the basic concepts of initial public offerings and then
have a look at some underlying theories behind underpricing and performance in
general of IPOs.




2.0 Initial public offerings
An initial public offering (IPO) is when a formerly private company goes public i.e.
lists itself on a stock exchange. The previously privately owned company gives
investors the opportunity buy the company's shares for the first time. IPOs are in
practice the most convenient way for a company to start trading its securities,
especially shares such as common stock. The most common way to offer the shares to
the public is through a new issue, which is when a company offers new shares to the
public in hopes of raising new capital. In some cases only existing shares (owned by
major shareholders) are offered, but in practice most IPOs are a mixture of both
existing shares and new shares. (Jenkinson & Ljungqvist 2001).


2.1 Why firms go public

Most initial public offerings are from small and fast-growing companies searching for
capital to finance their business. Basically there are two ways to attain capital. One
way is to go to the bank and taking a loan, and another way is by performing an IPO.
However, IPOs are time consuming and expensive, but it's a decision that gives a
long-term strategic plan for the company (Jenkinson & Ljungqvist 2001). For
example, let's say that you are an entrepreneur who has started a business, with a
great business idea. It has created value for the shareholders and you are eager to go
further with your company but you don`t have the internal operational and external
borrowing capacity. IPOs present an alternative opportunity to expand your business
and presents lots of new possibilities in oppose to loaning from the bank. On the other
hand you might just be an investor looking for a opportunity to exit from the
investment to receive a return.

In conclusion most firms go public to gain capital and to add liquidity to the
ownership.


2.2 The advantages of going public

There are several advantages in going public. In this section I will present the most
common upsides that an IPO presents.

By going public firms get more capital, that gives the company better opportunities
for growth and expanding which is a clear advantage. Companies might want to
finance an acquisition, buy-out existing shareholders, invest in research &
development or move into larger and more diverse markets.

Another advantage is the improved financial status. Commonly IPOs help companies
finance growth in the future and to achieve an optimal debt-to-equity ratio, which in
turn makes it easier for borrowing additional funds, and renegotiating the existing
debt on more favorable terms (KPMG).

After an IPO companies have higher visibility (due to the news around them and the
fact that they are listed on a stock exchange), which usually works in their favor as a
good marketing factor. The wider and more diverse investor base creates added public
awareness, which can give the companies' products or services a better visibility in
the markets. These competitive advantages can help perform better than the other
companies in the same industry and at the same time makes it easier to expand
nationally or internationally (KPMG).

Public companies often have a way to motivate the employees by compensating them
by a stock-based compensation strategy. Trying to retain managers and key
employees by giving the company's shares, and it also gives additional opportunity
for the employees to take part of the financial success of the company. If the stock-
prices rise of the company, the employees that are involved in a stock-based
compensation program will benefit from this. In other words going public will
increase employee motivation and retention (Jenkinson & Ljungqvist 2001).

When the companies' shares go public, it will increase the liquidity and gives the
shareholders the ability to exchange shares. The shares will also become more
acceptable as collateral for personal loans.


2.3 The disadvantages of going public

Probably the biggest disadvantage is that the company loses its privacy. As a public
company, they have increased scrutiny and accountability. This means that they have
to report more information about the company's business operations, executive
officers compensation, customers, competition, and material contracts. By sharing this
information to the public, it will result to that competitors will be able to know your
standing on the market. The material that has to be shared to the public could be
sensitive for the company, for example geographic segment, compensations and the
operating result of the company. Public firms are also under constant pressure to meet
the market expectations, and explaining the decisions that have been made and how to
deal with things that concern the company (KPMG 2010).

Reporting requirements are not the same as for non-public companies. There will be
new reporting requirements, filing financial statements quarterly and annually. This
leads to significant commitment of time and resources by senior management and
other personnel. It can lead to that companies have to re-new their existing accounting
and reporting system, which takes time and money.

There is also a risk of potential increases in income taxes. Depending on in which
country the company is located (Jenkinson & Ljungqvist 2001).

The control of the company decreases when the ownership changes and there will be
a bigger spread of different owners. This can be both a good thing and a bad thing.
But in most cases majority stake remains with largest shareholders even after IPOs.


3. Theoretical framework
In this chapter I will more thoroughly discuss the theories behind underpricing. There
are various theories and hypothesis behind this phenomena.


3.1.1 Reason for underpricing

According to Ljungqvist (2006) underpricing is estimated as the percentage
difference between the price at which the IPO shares were sold to investors (the offer
price) and the price at which the shares subsequently trade in the market. As we
know the three parties in an IPO transaction are the issuing firm, the bank that is
underwriting and marketing the deal, and the new investors.

Theories of underpricing can be grouped into four headings: asymmetric information,
institutional, control, and behavioral. I will present the theories that I find to be most
relevant in the case of Finnish Technology IPOs.

3.1.2 Information Revelation Theories
This theory initially introduced by Benveniste & Spindt (1989) involves the investors
and underwriters in the bookbuilding process of the IPO. When the underwriters are
bookbuilding, i.e. gather interest from the investors in order to help set the offer price,
the investment bankers purposely underprice the IPO shares in order to get investors
to reveal their truthful valuations of the shares. Investors would have no incentive to
give positive information ­ raising the offer price ­ if they can't be sure that they are
still getting them a bit underpriced (Ibbotson & Ritter 1995).



3.1.3 The Cascades Hypothesis
Welch (1992) presented a model in which investors rely not solely on their own
information and knowledge, but also about other investors' actions. Thus they are
more willing to buy IPO shares if they notice that others are also buying, and vice
versa if no one is buying they will not buy either. This leads to the theory that there is
incentive for the issuer to underprice the shares in order to get the first investors
interested and get things rolling.

3.1.4 The Signaling Hypothesis
The idea behind the signaling hypothesis is leaving your customers (investors in this
case) happy simply by underpricing the new issues, allowing the firms and insiders to
sell future offerings at a higher price.

3.1.5 Ownership Dispersion Hypothesis
The ownership dispersion model hypothesizes that issuing firms intentionally
underprice their shares in order to attract and disperse ownership of the firm to a large
number of small investors. This in turn gives the firm more liquidity on the stock
market and prevents outsiders to challenge the firm's management (takeover).


3.1.6 Long run Underperformance

Several studies have shown that IPOs tend underperform in the long run. For example
a study from Ritter (1991) documented an average of -15.08 % 36 months after initial
public offering (sample size: 1526 US firms, documented during 1975-1984). There
have been many empirical studies on this subject in different geographical areas and
with different measures for "long run".



Finnish technology related IPOs during Tech bubble
The technology bubble took place around the year 2000. There were 15 tech-
companies in Finland who made an initial public offering during the years 1998 to
2002, which are still operating and listed in NASDAQ OMX Helsinki.

A list of the companies and the dates when they entered to the NASDAQ OMX
Helsinki public stock market:


    [Table]


IPOs in Finland
The company`s initial public offerings is a phenomenon highly cyclical and irregular.
The yearly amount of IPOs varies a lot by time. Initial Public offerings occurs usual
in peaks, when the economy is strong and stays in an "economic boom" and the stock
indices are high. In Finland there have been two quite major IPO periods, and one a
bit smaller. The years 1984-1989 can be described as the biggest period when IPOs
occurred in Finland, with 92 IPOs. The second large amount of public offerings

                                                                                   7
occurred around the year 2000, when the "The Information Technology Bubble" burst
out. The amount of IPOs during the bubble was highest the year 1999, when there
were 19 of them. After the Information Technology Bubble, there have been
noticeably smaller amounts of IPOs, before the financial crisis in 2007, there has been
less than ten IPOs (Selosmaa 2007).

[Figure]

4.0 Previous studies on the Finnish market

4.1 Keloharju

Keloharjus study (1993) was the first IPO study performed on the Finnish market.
Keloharju used a sample of 79 IPO firms from the time period of 1984-1989. He
estimated the long run performance by calculating the cumulative abnormal return
(CAR) from a three year holding period and benchmarked the IPOs performance to
the market-index HEX. Keloharjus results showed the same phenomena as previous
international studies i.e. initial high returns and long run underperformance. Keloharju
also discovered that the long run underperformance is more common in small firms.


4.2 Sandström

Sandströms study (2000) was performed on the Helsinki Stock Exchange and mainly
investigated the economic cycle effects on IPOs. The study had a large sample of 147
IPOs from a time period 1984-2000. Sandström used a similar method as Keloharju
and also benchmarked the IPOs to the market-index, and to not much surprise her
study showed the same results as Keloharju; high initial returns and long run
underperformance.


4.3 Ahlberg

The Master's thesis from Ahlberg (2002) differed from Keloharju (1993) and
Sandström (2000) in that instead of using only the market-index as a benchmark
Ahlberg also used similar firms (same industry and size). However, Ahlberg had a
relatively small sample of 49 IPO firms and measured a time period from 1994-1999.
Ahlbergs results were the same as Keloharju and Sandströms studies when
benchmarking to the market index. However when the returns of the same IPOs were
benchmarked to similar companies the IPO firms showed significantly better
performance than the similar firms during the first 22 months and slightly better at the
three year mark after the IPO. However should be noted that over 50 % of Ahlbergs
sample firms were IT-firms and many of the measurements were taken during a
bullish market before the IT-bubble crash.


5.0 Data
The stock data and index will be retrieved from NASDAQ OMX.


5.1 Restrictions
The study is restricted to initial public offerings on the Helsinki Stock Exchange from
the time period 1998-2002. The sample size consists of all the 15 technology
companies that have performed IPOs on OMX Helsinki. Because the times IPOs
entered during 4 years period, during the bubble, I decided to start my performance
investigation from year 2002, when every one of the 15 companies had entered to the
public stock market.


6.0 Method
I will perform an own investigation on IPOs long run performance (10 years from
8.3.2002 ­ 8.3.2012) on the Helsinki Stock Exchange (NASDAQ OMX Helsinki). By
calculating the holding-period return (HPR) and comparing the HPR to that of the
market index to be able to see how the IPOs have performed.


6.1 Measuring return

I will measure the performance of the IPOs by comparing the returns of each IPO
company to the stock market index (OMX Helsinki).

6.1.1 Long run performance
To calculate the long run performance, first I will calculate the holding period return
(HPR) for each stock. The end-of-period value [Formula] initial value [Formula] divided by
the initial value.




After the HPR is known, I will calculate the market index return for the same period
as the IPO. The market index is calculated using the same holding period return
formula.




After retrieving both of these measures, I can calculate the abnormal returns for each
stock separately, abnormal returns will function as the measure of performance.




Ultimately I will add all abnormal returns together to calculate the average of IPOs to
draw my conclusions.


6.2 Hypothesis

The purpose of this study was to see how technology IPO's have performed in the
Finnish equity market. In this section I will present my hypothesis.

6.2.1 Hypothesis : Long run performance
The hypothesis is about long run performance. Based on earlier research (Ritter,
Keloharju, Sandström) I expect to see that the IPOs have underperformed the market
index after the 10 years period.

Hypothesis: IPOs underperform the market index after ten years from the initial
offering.

H0:

H1:




7.0 Results
The results show that on average the long term performance of abnormal returns are -
11,55 % less than the OMX Helsinki index performs on the time period 8.3.2002 ­
8.3.2012. During the same period the OMX Helsinki index performed -2,61 %. This
result agrees with the previous studies (Keloharju, Sandström & Ahlberg), that in the
long run the IPOs are underperforming.

The results of each company and the return.

[Table]




There were only four of the fifteen companies that performed better than the index.
These companies are highlighted with the green color and the rest which done worse
than the index are on white ground. The average return of all the IPO companies and
the OMX return are highlighted as red. Due to a small sample size of (N=15)
observations these results do not probably indicate the average of the performance in
the long run. I can conclude that H0 can be accepted, and say that the market index is
performing better than all of the IPO companies together.


8.0 Conclusion
The purpose of this study was to investigate the performance of technology IPOs in
the Finnish stock market. I have done an own research in investigating the long run
performance of these technology companies. We can conclude that these companies
have been underperforming in the long run, compared to the market index.

These results should be pretty good comparably to each other, because the research of
the performance have started the same day for all these 15 companies and also ended
at the same time. The study starts at 8.3.2002, when the bubble had already burst so
that all the companies should be fairly comparable to each other. This 10 years
interval also includes the financial crisis in 2007, which also has affected these results
and still the economy is in a vulnerable position, which also can indicate to these
underperforming results.


