ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF DIGITAL PIRACY: A short overview of the public good nature of digital goods and DRM as an attempt to solve it



1 Introduction
 

The digital revolution and other technological breakthroughs of the past several decades
have brought intellectual property to the forefront of economic, social, and political
interest. Digital technology has not only permitted the creation of many new goods or
services, but has also dramatically changed the way an entire category of goods in the
economy are created, produced, distributed, exchanged and consumed. In addition
digital technology has allowed media content to be flawlessly copied and redistributed
through largely anonymous peer-to-peer digital networks. These new challenges have
raised lots of discussions and concerns amongst different interest groups ­ especially
amongst right holders.


Moreover, the growing importance of digital technology has spurred research on the
economic understandings of digital piracy activity. In order to understand the economic
analysis of digital piracy, one must first understand the nature of digital goods. Digital
goods are public goods; the public good nature of digital goods is likely to lead to a free
riding behavior, i.e. digital piracy, of consumers. In response to digital piracy, the
music and movie industry began to adopt technological measures, often referred as to
Digital Rights Management (hereinafter DRM), to control the sale and distribution of
music and other digital goods over the internet.


In their research Rayna and Striukova suggest that DRM systems based on rivalness
could be a solution for the public good problem. The basic problem with Rayna and
Striukova's suggestion is that it is practically impossible to make digital goods fully or
even at sufficient level rival or excludable. Thus, DRM cannot entirely or even
satisfactorily solve the public good problem of digital goods, which means that
alternative and more effective solutions are needed in order to suppress the overall rate
of digital piracy. However, the intention of this paper is not to propose any new ways or
ideas to reduce the overall rate of digital piracy, but rather show that DRM does not
solve the public good problem of digital goods, and the same applies to the suggestion
that Rayna and Striukova presents.


The progression of this study is as follows: the introduction chapter is followed by a
concise second chapter (2 Economic analysis of digital piracy) where the purpose is to
present shortly a relevant background for this study (2.1 Background), discuss the
public good characteristics of digital goods (2.2 Public good character of digital goods),
and DRM as a solution to this problem (2.3 DRM as an attempt to solve the public good
problem). The last chapter (3 Conclusion) contains a précis of the subject matter.



2 Economic analysis of digital piracy
2.1 Background
 

Although it is true that piracy, in the form of copies of vinyl discs, audio and video
tapes, photocopies of books etc., has existed long before the advent of digital goods, the
piracy of the pre-digital era was different and never reached the extent of digital piracy.
Earlier an infringer who wanted to distribute or reproduce counterfeit copies of movies,
music or computer programs needed the same sort of production and distribution
facilities that the copyright owner did. Thus, it is clear that end-user copies were not a
serious threat to a copyright owner's sales during the twentieth century. Actually, end-
user copies were often made for the copier's own personal use, but not to substitute the
lawful copies. Moreover, these copies did not usually spread outside the personal use
zone: nowadays just one original digital unit is sufficient to start an infinite stream of
absolutely identical copies. These changes has led to a situation where right holders are
genuinely worried about the consequences ­ especially economic consequences ­ that
digital piracy may cause.


It is generally accepted that counterfeiting and piracy are global phenomena with
serious economic and social consequences not only in Europe but around the world.
Digital technology has caused a drastic decrease in reproduction costs and distribution
costs. This again is closely linked to end-user piracy activity. Nowadays, end-user
piracy is almost entirely related to digital goods. The growing end-user digital piracy
activity needs to be addressed in the right way. It is not acceptable to allow free-riding
by end-users, but on the contrary not every small infringement should be punishable
either. Trying to find the right balance in this environment has caused lots of concerns
for legislators, and there also have been active discussions about how far the protection
of copyright and related rights can be extended.


If the copyright protection is not sufficient or at the right level it may lead to the scarcity
of incentives. Incentives are essential in promoting future innovation. If the protection
of copyright is too high or too strict, it can cause problems from the access point of
view. Why there has to be public access to innovations? First of all, we have to
encourage future innovation by competitors and thus promote greater competition, and
secondly we have to enhance consumer welfare. The challenge here is to find the right
balance between incentives and access. If the balancing is unsuccessful it can cause
welfare loss (no innovation, no consumer welfare, and no economic growth). This again
is closely linked to the problem of public goods. Public good characteristic of
innovation provides an important economic rationale for intellectual property rights
(hereinafter IPRs). IPRs are seen as a solution for the public good problem: IPRs
provides legal control over reproduction which again creates incentive for innovation
while facilitating limited public access.13


2.2 Public good character of digital goods
 

Public goods are defined as goods that are both non-rival in consumption and non-
excludable. Non-rivalrous means that use by one person does not prevent others from
using the same information. In its natural state, knowledge is also non-excludable. That
is, even if someone claims to own the knowledge, it is difficult to exclude others from
using it. The principal objectives of intellectual property law are the promotion and
protection of new and improved works. Thus, intellectual property law is an attempt to
solve the public good problem by legal means; it grants exclusive use of the protected
knowledge or creative work to the creator.


Digital products exhibit the fundamental characteristics of a public good, or actually
they have a tendency to behave as public goods. Since digital goods are replicable
they are non-rival (consumers can make copies of digital goods and thus many
consumers can enjoy the same unit of digital goods at the same time) and since they are
non-rival, they are indirectly non-excludable (producers are able to exclude consumers
directly but cannot prevent consumers from copying the good from other consumers).
As a consequence, as digital goods spread among the population of consumers they
virtually become fully non-excludable, thereby giving them the same economic
characteristics as public goods.


Music, games, movies and other digital products are information and digital goods.
These digital goods are expensive to produce for the first copy (high fixed costs), and
inexpensive to reproduce and distribute for subsequent copies (near zero variable
costs). The digital nature of these goods means that they are replicable and they can be
infinitely copied without any loss of quality or information. The public nature of
digital goods is likely to lead to a free riding behavior, i.e. piracy, of consumers: an
individual consumes a public good without actually paying for it. The inability of
firms to exclude consumers leads to a wide piracy phenomenon and, thus, undermines
their ability to make profits and recover the initial fixed cost of production.


As the costs of producing and distributing copies approach zero, the public goods
problem gets worse, because the ratio of the cost of creation to the cost of imitation
approaches infinity. Further, as the cost of producing and disseminating copies
approaches zero, the sharp division between professional counterfeiters and end-user
copiers breaks down. Anyone can give copies of software or music to others on the
Internet in a variety of ways and it costs virtually nothing to do so. Shortly it can be
said that the fact that digital goods are public goods bears important consequences. The
considerably large number of these goods in the economy, as well as their ever growing
importance, greatly affects the traditional balance between public goods and private
goods in the economy. It is obvious that right holders and industry are willing to do
almost anything in order to change the public good nature of digital goods ­ in other
words turn them into private goods ­ and thus hoping that the overall rate of digital
piracy reduces.


2.3 DRM as an attempt to solve the public good problem (approx. 2-3 pages)


      DRM  explaining
       How DRM is linked to digital goods and digital piracy?
             Will it stop piracy?
             Can it change the nature of digital goods (from public to private)


      Rayna and Striukova
             DRM systems based on rivalness could be a solution for the public good
                 problem
                         The problem generally (main analysis)
                         The problem with their suggestion (main analysis)
                         hacking removes the private good characteristics (main analysis)
                         other problems that have been linked to DRM




3 Conclusion (approx. 1 page)
 

 

