Organizational Structure change with Cloud Computing SaaS

I. INTRODUCTION
INCE the appearance of the Internet, remote web access
from any place and at any time has given the possibility
for organizations to use different resources outside its
premises. This includes storage of data in remote
infrastructure or servers, applications built on platforms
supplied by third parties, and software which is simply
accessible though a web browser without the need to
purchase any licenses. These remote resources, accessible
through the Internet, are called Cloud Computing.
Cloud computing enables the outsourcing of most of the
organizational IT infrastructure to third parties, who offer
Software (SaaS), Platform (PaaS), and Infrastructure (IaaS)
as a Service. Cloud Computing provides the possibility to
delegate the responsibility of most of the IT function of the
organization in exchange of a subscription or “pay as you
go” fee. Thus, Cloud computing is characterized by
scalability, new IT paradigm, measured service, on-demand
self-service, availability, reliability and elasticity (Gartner,
2008; Duncan D., Xingchen C., Vecchiola C. and Buyya R.,
2009).
With this possibility, organizations perceive the
opportunity to decrease their capital and human investment
in IT resources. The opportunity for organizations to
outsource most of their IT responsibilities is a paradigm shift
in the way IT business has been done. Thus, when adopting
Software as a Service in the Cloud, organizations “just” need
to ensure that the cloud provider delivers what has been
agreed upon in the Service Level Agreement (SLA).
Besides the mentioned opportunities, organizations now
face the challenge of restructuring their IT structure linked to
the business strategy. Some of the challenges are: What
happens to the previous IT structure in the enterprise? How
do Organizations evolve and change to adapt to this new
type of IT offer? Do existing positions disappear? Does the
Enterprise needs to restructure its IT department? Are new
positions created to deal with risk assessment and
management of Cloud Computing solutions?
The aim of this study is to answer these questions,
specifically: How are enterprises changing their structure
when adopting SaaS in the Cloud? Current research lacks a
more holistic view of cloud customer’s IT organizational
structure and IT Governance transformation. No previous
research has been found when it comes to human resources
and internal policies change. This is supported by Hosseini
A., Sommerville I. and Sriram I. (2010), who present a list
of “Research challenges for enterprise cloud computing”.
One of the issues is: the authority of the IT – where
enterprise users will have more political influence, and “the
IT department's role will change from “provider to certifier,
consultant and arbitrator”” (Hosseini A. et al., 2010, p.3).
Thus, an exploratory study is proposed to answer the
questions presented. A Case study, with in-depth
unstructured interviews, is considered the best method to
retrieve information about the changes. The changes
identified help to observe the current evolution in the case
company and their lessons learned.
The successful and unsuccessful approaches identified
help to create an understanding of different trends. Current
and potential cloud customers are the main audience of this
study, which can help to analyze the difficulties and
opportunities for IT governance and IT infrastructure
changes in organizations. Furthermore, it enables the
development of new tools and techniques to facilitate the
migration to Cloud Computing. Finally, Cloud Computing is
constantly evolving so organizations need to always keep
themselves up to date about the different variables that allow
for a successful migration linked to their business model and
strategy.
The current paper is structured as follows. The next
section describes Cloud Computing, followed by the current
research background on why organizations need to adapt
internally to these new technology adoption. Then, a deep
discussion is presented related to what kind of changes are
needed and why. This is after linked to the proposed
research framework to use in this study. Finally, the
empirical methodology is explained and presented, which is
followed by the analysis of the main results. Conclusions are
then presented based on the main findings.
II. CLOUD COMPUTING
Cloud computing aims at providing users and businesses a
whole package of application systems through the web,
which can be either as a service, a platform or an
infrastructure. Organizations don’t have the need to store
their data on company specific location servers, nor to
manage it or even to own software applications. In other
words, the organizations will be completely dependent on
the cloud computing provider for data access, data analysis
and to run the whole business applications.
It will, however, provide access anytime anywhere as long
as there is internet connection, and a service agreement
settled by the organization and the cloud computing service
provider. There are several definitions given to Cloud
Computing either from technology, advisory and market
research companies, to IT Companies, and Regulatory
Institutes and National Organizations. Some of the
definitions are presented in Table 1:

[Table]

It can be observed that Cloud Computing is a recent
concept in development, where research companies were the
first ones approaching this new phenomenon or paradigm on
the way IT business will be conducted on the future. Further
on, regulatory entities found the need to define this concept
and referrer the potential opportunities that it can bring on
the markets and economy. All the definitions presented
agree on common characteristics such as: scalability, new IT
paradigm, measured service, on-demand self-service,
availability, reliability and elasticity.
Cloud computing is moving towards the stage of Rapid
Cloud Computing Adoption, and this is possible due to
several Companies investment in IaaS that will support the
further layers that will enable the PaaS and SaaS. Cloud
Computing Market is expected to be adapted in to marketbased
strategies, which will shape the IT infrastructure of the
future, especially when the Security, control and trust issues
are overcome (Vecchiola C., Duncan D., and Buyya R.,
2009).

III. WHY ORGANIZATIONS NEED TO ADAPT INTERNALLY?
Although cloud computing presents many benefits, it also
comes with many risks related to reliability, “integrity,
recovery, and privacy, and an evaluation of legal issues in
areas such as e-discovery, regulatory compliance, and
auditing” (Brodkin J., 2008).
Of the 3 main categories of Cloud Computing services
mentioned: SaaS, PaaS and IaaS, SaaS is considered the
most risky. Thus, the focus of this study is in SaaS. With
SaaS, the Governance structure of IT in organizations is
expected to change dramatically. The infrastructure,
platform and application will no longer be hosted under the
premises and in direct control of the Cloud Customer (CC).
CC will mainly have access to the application through an
internet browser. Thus, Cloud Provider (CP) increases his
control while CC needs to take the necessary steps to adapt
its organizational structure to this new emerging business
model in the software industry (Mather T., Kumaraswamy S.
and Latif S., 2009).
The reasons why many organizations choose to use SaaS
are related to “social influence, attitude towards SaaS -
adoption, adoption uncertainty, and strategic value”
(Benlian, A., Hess, T., and Buxmann, P., 2009, p.1).
However, when organizations are considering SaaS, a new
business-IT alignment, skills, project teams, policies, risk
management and assessment teams, and compliance are
needed. The risks mentioned can be reduced or prevented if
it is established a “proactive program management office to
implement industry best practices and government policies
in the management of any program” (Paquette S., Jaeger P.
T., Wilson S. C., 2010, p. 4)
“Risk Management program focused on cloud computing
is an essential part of the government IT environment”
(Paquette S. et al., 2010, p. 1). Furthermore, risks concerning
the implementation, management, and usage of cloud
computing need an adequate strategy to enable good
administration and soften potential risks. Identifying the
risks should be the first priority in order to find ways of
preventing them or to assess them if they are inevitable
(Paquette S. et al., 2010). There are several risks identified
3
when a new technology is implemented, such as: policy
changes, dynamic applications and securing the dynamic
environment (Paquette S. et al., 2010). They can be reduced
or prevented if it is established a “proactive program
management office to implement industry best practices and
government policies in the management of any program”
(Paquette S. et al., 2010, p. 4).
IT governance has an important role on the ability to
identify, assess, and mitigate the risks surrounding the use of
cloud computing. This happens since it focuses on internal
and external compliance initiatives. Thus, it provides
decision making process to all stakeholders and assignment
of accountability within the IT organization. An appropriate
governance structure can help to effectively inspect the risk
management program (Paquette S. et al., 2010).
IV. ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE CHANGE: BUSINESS-IT
ALIGNMENT, POLICIES, RISK MANAGEMENT AND ASSESSMENT
When moving into the cloud, an important aspect
concerns the internal organizational structure of Cloud
Customer (CC). CC can no longer rely merely on its
implemented internal Security infrastructure. By adopting
services on the cloud, especially in the case of sensitive data,
CC not only needs to ensure the Cloud Provider (CP) has in
place the needed security requirements according to its
business and internal policies needs. CC needs as well to
adapt its existing organizational structure to allow security
and compliance in place by monitoring all the activity of the
SaaS in the Cloud. Qualify of Service (QoS) can only exist if
CC develops adequate parameters to be measured together
with CP in a constant live monitoring plus service follow up
meetings (Rittinghouse J. and Ransome J., 2009).
Information Security department in organizations will
move to a more strategic role where IT Governance main
focus will be related decisions, implementations, monitoring,
risk management and assessment, and IT-business strategic
alignment to explore potential opportunities with the use of
Cloud Computing. This includes Security Governance where
a Security steering committee can provide “guidance about
security initiatives and alignment with business and IT
strategies”. Such change is indispensable when starting to
use applications in the cloud. Roles and responsibilities
related to information security need to be set and explained
for efficient change in the organization (Rittinghouse J. and
Ransome J., 2009, p. 165).
Other roles are related to Risk Management and Risk
Assessment. Risk management involves identification,
maintenance and accountability in important areas of the
organization, like: “technology assets; data and its links to
business processes, applications, and data stores” and
“information assets including protection requirements, and
custodians implement confidentiality, integrity, availability,
and privacy controls” (Rittinghouse J. and Ransome J.,
2009, p. 165). These formal actions are not completed until
proper descriptions of needed procedures to support the risk
management are formed. Risk assessment enables such
descriptions, allocation of resources and prioritization of
actions between normal business operations and the
protection of information. Moreover, it provides the
identification of proper controls that help decrease security
risks besides reviewing if those are in place and working
properly. Information security can then have a link between
the business needs and internal policies with the proper
allocation of resources, controls, and maintenance
(Rittinghouse J. and Ransome J., 2009).
However, without training individuals along the
organization, and in particular direct users and the people
involved in the risk management and risk assessment, the
exposure to risk can increase due to unaware security
vulnerabilities. Specific and general training for using SaaS
can help enhance the right behaviors towards information
security and provide updated training in a developing and
changing environment such as the cloud computing
(Rittinghouse J. and Ransome J., 2009).
Besides training, “a cloud computing security team should
first identify the information security and business
requirements unique to cloud computing, SaaS, and
collaborative software application security” (Rittinghouse J.
and Ransome J., 2009, p. 167). These requirements are met
by the deployment, execution and documentation of policies,
standards, and guidelines. Again, these ones need to be
updated according to periodic reviews and/or change in the
business requirements to prevent disclosure of information
(Rittinghouse J. and Ransome J., 2009).
Security processes related to using SaaS in the Cloud need
to be implemented having in consideration the business
requirements and organization internal policies and controls.
Thus, when designing the security architecture the following
security processes should be designed along the different
layers of the IT structure of the organization: authentication,
authorization, availability, confidentiality, integrity,
accountability and privacy (Rittinghouse J. and Ransome J.,
2009, p. 172). It will allow future reviews to be designed
accordingly making the whole process easier.
In a Cloud environment, data becomes more vulnerable
when stored outside the premises of the organization.
Therefore, when it comes to whom, how and what actions
can be performed related to information data, a Data
Governance framework can help to define, nominate
responsibilities by increasing awareness of the areas of data
Inventory, classification, analysis, protection, privacy,
retention/recovery/discovery and destruction (Rittinghouse J.
and Ransome J., 2009, p. 175).

V. RESEARCH FRAMEWORK
Most of the findings under our literature review are
theoretical frameworks and recommendations. The majority
is from the professional or market side, with little from the
academia. A more empirical approach is needed through a
Case Study as an exploratory research. The goal is to
analyze how and why in practice the change occurred in the
case organization. In-depth interviews are the main data
collection. The aim is to “recognize important themes,
patterns and relationships” (Sanders M., Lewis P. and
Thornhill A., 2009, p. 488) in the changes indentified.
Holistic research framework presented here aims to
analyze cross functionally the organization.

[Figure]

List of in-depth unstructured interview questions to put in
the appendice:
1. When did the organization started to used SaaS in the
Cloud?
2. How did it start the decision to consider SaaS?
3. How long did the process take to decide to go into
SaaS? Why? (cost savings, IT business strategy in the
short and long run or...?)
4. Why was SaaS chosen and not other? Criteria (network,
hosting, application security, APIs, price, any additional
costs for enhancement of security controls to handle
sensitive and regulated data?)
5. With the adoption of SaaS were there any changes to
existing internal practices? If so, how and why has it
happened? (any risk assessment, development of a risk
treatment plan, and implementation of processes for
responding to identified issues => all these still linked to
the business strategy and needs)
6. Any changes as well in the structure of the
organization? Why?
7. Has there been recruited new people with new
skills?why?
8. Has there been provided any specific training related to
the SaaS? who and why?
9. What were so far the biggest challenges in the
organization regarding the adoption of SaaS in the
Cloud? Why? Would you do it differently?
10. How has the continuous improvement been conducted
to keep up the cloud computing developments in terms
of Information Security best practices?
11. How and how long did it take for CC to decide how the
Risk management would be structured and the
allocation of resources for risk assessment?
12. How were identified the different kind of professionals
to be included in the risk management and risk
assessment related to the SaaS?
13. How have the processes been defined to decide when
periodic review meetings should take place? How where
the parameter that are reviewed in those review
meetings defined?
14. Has there been any training provided to users related to
Security issues and others (please describe briefly) to
use SaaS? How and who provided it? Why training was
provided?
15. How about training to the internal security team and
(link this to fundamental security and risk management
skills and knowledge inside the organization)?
16. Have there been any policies implemented? Why and
how has it been developed, documented and
implemented?
17. Have there been any changes to the policies, standards
and guidelines related to SaaS since the beginning?
Why have they occurred? (is it due to review on any
basis or due to significant changes in the business or IT
environment?)

VI. EMPIRICAL RESEARCH
A. Research Methodology
The case study company is an industrial big multinational
supplier with is headquarters in Finland. This company has
adopted SaaS in the cloud since 2006. Therefore, 5 years has
passed since its adoption, being considered a good subject of
study for the changes occurred.
The chosen interviewees are from different areas in the
organization. From the top level management the
interviewees are responsible for the decision and
implementation of the changes occurred. A Head of
Technology and global strategic and a Director, head of h
process solution-customer interviewed for this purpose.
Other relevant interviewees are a platform owner,
responsible for in-depth processes changes due to SaaS; a
representative from the Legal department due to the Service
Level Agreement; and an Information Security Officer
SaaS
Strategic
decision
Needed
changes
identified
Why?
How
implemented?
Monitoring
and
feedback
related to training, risk management and assessment
planning.
