Service Development Process

1. Introduction and research problem

The service sector has become increasingly important in world economy: in 2008, the value added of service industry was 69% of the world’s gross domestic product (The World Bank, 2010). The growth of service industry creates ever competitive environment, and for industry or a company to be successful in this environment it needs to innovate continuously and develop its services. 

Due to the increasing importance of service industry, the service development has also become an important area of research (Menor and Roth, 2007), as innovation in service industry has proven to create greater revenues for companies (de Jong and Vermeulen, 2003). However, the area of service development is relatively new, as the recognition of service industry as its own discipline has only evolved during past three decades. This is also evident in the amount of studies made in service development as there were very few published articles in the 1980’s but more than 20 every year during the 21st century (de Jong and Vermeulen, 2003). 

New services come to market and the question is “How?” Based on the previous studies service development is mostly considered as ‘ad hoc’, a process that just happens (Kelly & Storey, 2000) with non detailed process (de Brentani, 1991). However, the process of organising the service development is important in service development. De Brentani concludes about success factors for service development that “...companies need to be proficient in how they go about developing new services (...) analysis indicate that a formal and planned approach to new service development leads to better performance” (1991:54-55). 

The formal process gives systematic means to transfer idea into offering. The more successful service firms tend to have more formal service development process. Griffin (1997, as cited in Menor and Roth, 2007) identified that the “best” service firms are using more formal process for service development than the less innovative and Roth et al. (1997, as cited in Menor and Roth, 2007) referred that “world class” services are born in companies with formal service development process. This indicates that a process is an important part of the service development and that special emphasis should be put on it when managing a service development. 

2. Purpose and structure of the study 
The aim of the paper is to study service development process based on the previous studies. In particular, the purpose is to identify different types of service development process models and the steps of the process. In addition, the aim is to highlight future research ideas related to service development process. 
The structure of the paper is following: firstly, the service and service development concepts are explained; secondly, the currently known service development processes are looked into; and lastly, conclusions of the findings are drawn.

3. Service development 

This chapter reviews previous studies related to service development process. It starts by outlining the concept of service and definitions used in the field of service development. Then service development concept and different models for service development process are looked into. 

3.1. Service and service development concepts
This chapter will first look into the definition of service and then, the various service development terminologies and concepts are outlined.

3.1.1. Definition of service
Service is defined to be heterogeneous, intangible, and simultaneously consumed and produced (Kelly and Storey 2000; de Jong and Vermeulen 2003; Alam and Perry 2002; Menor, Tatikonda and Sampson, 2002).  Grönroos (2007:53) gives three characteristics for service: service is process consisting of series of activities, service is produced and consumed simultaneously, and customer acts as a co-producer in the production process. 

Service concept is not only related to “service industry” but many companies providing tangible products offer some kind or some level of services with the product (Smith et al., 2007). These services can be augmented offering to the physical product, for example, after sales, maintenance and insurance services. Because products tend to become commodities, the service offered with the product creates additional benefits for the producer: it differentiates the commodity from the competitors, creates more customer value and hence becomes a competitive advantage (Edvardsson, Gustafsson, Kristensson, Magnusson and Mathing, 2006).

3.1.2. Definition of service development 

There are several different concepts and definitions related to service development: service innovation, new service development (NSD) and service development. Service innovation, NDS and service development are used interchangeably and the key characteristic in all of them is that something new in the area of service is developed and implemented (de Jong and Vermeulen, 2003). 

Menor and Roth defines new service as “offering not previously available to the firm’s customers that results from either addition to the current mix of services or from changes made to the service delivery process” (2007:826). In this definition it is stressed that new service and service development is related both to the process as to the service concept. Johnson et al. states that “NSD refers to an overall process of developing new service offerings” (2000:5). Von Koskull (2009:8) uses following definition “an organizational process that aims to create a totally new or a revised service”. Additionally, von Koskull (2009:7) notes that it is important to recognise that there is not one agreed definition for the service development. In this study, the definition by von Koskull is used. 

As mentioned earlier, service innovation and NSD/service development can be interpreted to encompass the same factors. However, the term service innovation originates from economics and business strategy, and focuses on developing theories. Service development or NSD, on the other hand, emanates from the service management and marketing, and focuses on practises in service development. (Menor et al., 2002) In this light, the term NSD or service development is more suitable for this study than service innovation. In addition, NSD and service development are used as one term in the literature but in order to make the study more reader friendly only term, service development, is used from this on. 

It is also important to make distinction between ‘service development’ and ‘developed service’: service development is the process to reach the outcome i.e. developed service (von Koskull, 2009:8). 

3.3. Service development process
Cooper et al. (1994) defined the service development process to be “set of stages and activities, actions, or tasks that moves the project from the idea stage to final launch” (as cited in Johnson et al., 2000:5). As service is intangible in nature there is a need to “tangibilize” the service development process and make it more understandable and concrete for all the parties within the service development process (Menor et al. 2002). In other words, the service development process includes different tangible stages and steps which explain what is needed to be accomplished in order to develop a new service.

The amount and name of different steps of the service development process varies:  some have identified more steps (e.g. Scheuing and Johnson, 1989; Alam and Perry, 2002) while others have fewer steps (e.g. Bowers, 1989) or have incorporated several steps under fewer stages (e.g. Lievens, Moenaert and Jegers, 1999). Reasons for the differences between models are related to research focus: for example, to the service to be developed, the newness of the development, and to the industry of the developed service (Johnson et al. 2000; Alam and Perry 2002). 

Studies have come up with conflicting results whether formal process is followed by companies or not (Alam and Perry, 2002): some research have identified that companies do not follow a formal process (Kelly and Storey, 2000) but others have come up with opposite results (e.g. Edvardsson et al., 1996). One of the reasons for less formal process is the size of the company: when the company size decreases then process becomes less formal. This is mainly due to the fewer resources of the company. (Alam & Perry, 2002; Gottfridsson, 2010) No matter if a formal process is followed or not, there are evidences of benefits when the more formalised process is used (Menor and Roth, 2007). 

There is not one way to categorize service development models. Johnsson et al. (2000:10) used following categorization: partial, translational and comprehensive. Partial models include only part of the service development model, e.g. these models concentrate only to the beginning of the process. Translational models are based on Booz, Allen and Hamilton (BAH) new product development model (1968; as cited in Johnson et al., 2000:9), and the comprehensive model takes wider and more holistic view to the whole service development process. (Johnson et al., 2000:10). 

However, in this study the previous categorization is not feasible. This is due to the few reasons. Firstly, this study focuses on the whole process and does not only look into part of the study. Secondly, most of the service development models are not only based on BAH model but is has grown to be own area of research. Lastly, the recent service development models have more holistic view to the service development and do not look it only from one perspective (e.g. Alam and Perry, 2002). In this study the service development process models are grouped based on their structure to linear and cycle models. Next chapters will look into previously grouped models. 

3.3.1. Linear service development model 
Initial service development models were based on the product development studies as the research of product development started earlier (Johnson et al., 2000). The product development process model was initially linear and sequential i.e. process steps are designed in linear form and all the stages are performed in sequence, one after another. A good example of this is Booz, Allen and Hamilton (BAH) model that is presented with three different service development process models in the Table 1. 
[Table]
The BAH model, initially published in 1968 and improved 1982 (Booz, Allen and Hamilton, 1968, 1982, as cited in Johnson et al., 2000:12) created the basis of very systematic and formalized way of conducting product development and it was used as a basis for many service development models (Johnson et al. 2000:12). 

Bowers’ (1989) and Sheuing and Johnssons (1989) models are the first empirically tested service development models. Both of them are linear and sequential and the difference is in steps. Scheuing & Johnsson’s model is more exhaustive compared to Bower’s model. In addition, Scheuing and Johnsson’s model includes pre and post steps as well as personnel training. Personnel training is an important step for implementing the new service as new services often fail because personnel have not been trained properly (Sheuing and Johnssons, 1989). One of the features of service is interactivity i.e. personnel interaction with the customer and hence, personnel need to be trained properly to the new procedures and activities. 

In Avlonitis et al. empirical research the stages previously identified by other scholars were grouped under fewer stages. 

However, the newer product development models have different stages and the process has been identified to be parallel rather than sequential (Alam and Perry, 2002). This also influenced Alam and Perry (2002) to look how the service development process is conducted within the firms: is it parallel or sequential. In addition, due to nature of the service and the interactive role customer has in service process, Alam and Perry (2002) looked to the service development process by identifying customer interaction in a process. Customer involvement is identified to have bigger role in service development than in product development due to interactivity of the service (Alam & Perry, 2002). In the Figure 1 the stages of sequential and parallel models are presented. 
[Figure]
Alam and Perry (2002) identified through their empirical study 10 step model. Model has somewhat same steps as Bower’s (1989) and Scheuing and Johnson’s (1989) models. However, a different stage called ‘formation of cross-functional team’ was identified first time. This new step is already discussed in studies of product development and in other studies related to cross functionality of service development (Alam and Perry, 2002). However, Alam and Perry defined the step ‘formation of cross-functional team’ only involving internal cross-functional parties and not any external parties.
 
As mentioned earlier, it is identified in recent product development models that the process is not always sequential but it can be parallel as well (Johnson et al. 2000:13, Alam and Perry, 2002). Alam and Perry discovered three phases where the stages can be performed parallel as can be seen in Figure 2. However, the results are inconclusive which one of the models is better as there is still debate between scholars. Other researchers have identified linear to be most successful and the others have emphasised the importance of parallel model. Nonetheless, speed of the development process is identified to be one of the most important factor for companies and in order to speed the process some stages can be performed at the same time. In addition, it is important to note that especially the small enterprises have more parallel stages compared to the bigger companies. (Alam and Perry, 2002) Lastly, Alam and Perry (2002) also discovered what kind of customer input can be obtained during each stage. However, they did not define if or how the companies are collecting the customer input or if possibly collected customer input is really used for the service development. 

As a conclusion it can be said that linear service development models include various amounts of stages depending of the detailed level these steps are identified. In addition, the service development process steps can be parallel instead of sequential, especially if companies are smaller and resources are fewer (Alam and Perry, 2002). The same parallel process steps were also acknowledged by Johnson et al. (2000:13) and they created a conceptual model called process cycle model. Next the cyclical service development process model is presented. 

3.3.2. Process cycle model
The service development process cycle, presented in the Figure 2, is combining different aspects influencing to the service development process. The main idea of the model is that the development process is not linear but it is cyclical and the different phases or activities can overlap each other and to be iterative. The process cycle takes into account that the service development process involves and is revolved around different enablers (organizational context, teams, and tools) and resources (people, product, technology, and system). (Johnson et al., 2000:14; Gottfridsson, 2010; Menor et al. 2002)
[Figure]

The phases in the model evolve around planning and execution. Planning includes design and analysis and execution includes development and launch. In all of these four phases some more specific steps are included. Additionally, the use and importance of enablers during these two stages can be different (Johnson et al. 2000). In general, these phases do not differ much from the linear stages. 

The non-linear or cyclical model emphasis that different stages overlap with each other and that the process is highly iterative than sequential. This also fits to the empirical evidence that the service development process is often informal (Menor et al., 2002) and more flexible compared to the product development. The cyclical model is also good in a sense that it takes into account the different actors; for example, people in the service development process. This is important because service often is interactive and the role of human interaction is big in service delivery, and hence it can also have big impact in service development. 
4. Conclusions 
In overall, the literature review identified different models for service development process.  The form and different stages varied based on the studies.  Many researchers have agreed that the service development model rarely happens sequentially but many of the process steps are parallel. However, there is still debate how the process is formed: should it be cyclical or linear and parallel or sequential.  Additionally, it has been stated that a one specific model cannot encompass how all services are developed. The development process is strongly dependent in many various aspects such as the newness of the service, the size of the business, type of the industry, country in question etc. (Alam, 2006b) 

Even though the cyclical model encompasses several aspects influencing to the service development it is missing one feature: the importance of the customer in service development process. Even though many scholars have emphasised the importance of customer the actual customer interaction and the ways customers are present in the process is missing from the cyclical as well as from the linear models.

