Tobashi Scheme, ­The Failure of Japanese Corporate Governance? ­ Case Olympus


1. Introduction

In recent years, there has been wide interest in controlling managers. Agency problems have been
important contributors to financial crises. Considering agency relationships, the central corporate
governance problem is how managers are controlled. There are several mechanisms of corporate
governance, such as legal protection, boards, codes, and auditors, all of which serve to reduce
agency problems.      Because of a number of special characteristics, the corporate governance
mechanisms are used to varying degrees in different countries. For example Keiretsu (i.e. cross-
ownership) is common in Japan. The corporate governance mechanisms are created to add value to
shareholders. Nevertheless, the lack or failure of corporate governance mechanisms will destroy
shareholders wealth. (Thomsen 2009, 41-42.)


The separation of ownership and control gives rise to agency problems between the agents and the
principals, as stated by Fama and Jensen (1983). In order to control resulting agency problems,
corporations separate management and control. Despite the separation, the questions remains why
financial scandals still take place one after another. The corporate governance mechanisms are
needed to reduce agency problems. Fundamentally good corporate governance consists of tailoring
these mechanisms to the individual firm. It enhances and creates value (Thomsen 2009, 41, 240). It
is vital to answer questions: which CG mechanisms have failed in the most recent financial scandal
and what could have been done to prevent it?

The method being used is a descriptive case study. The research comprises an intensive analysis of
the most recent accounting scandal, Olympus. The data consists of Olympus's interim and year-end
reports, newspaper articles and interviews. The news paper articles are collected from financial
papers, such as Reuters, New York Times, Bloomberg and Financial Times. The articles contain
straight quotations from Olympus's management considering the events taken palace during the
accounting fraud. All the interviewees were working for or otherwise linked to Olympus at the time
of the scandal. The paper aims to produce conservative generalizations from the case study, for
example "if it is valid for this case, it is valid for all (or many) cases" or in negative form "if it is not
valid for this case, then it is not valid for any (or only few) cases."

Accounting scandals have shaken the world in the early 21st century. They arise with the disclosure
of misdeeds by trusted executives. The scandals indicate that some corporate governance
mechanisms have failed. The purpose of this paper is to explore which corporate governance
mechanisms tend to fail in accounting scandals and how to prevent these scandals. It is important to
point out which factors led to accounting scandals and how to prevent them, since the abuse, for
example earnings management, can be completely legal or quasi legal.

The structure of this paper is as follows. Chapter 2 defines corporate governance in this particular
context and presents the most widely-used corporate governance theory, agency theory. Chapter 3
lists the mechanisms of corporate governance, which all serve to mitigate agency problems. Chapter
4 focuses on Japanese corporate governance and its special characteristics. Chapter 5 provides
background information about a financial scheme designed for privileged customers. Chapter 6
highlights issues of Japanese corporate governance through the case Olympus. Chapter 7 analyzes
the issues and provides solutions. Chapter 8 draws conclusions and suggestions for further research.




2. Agency Problems and Corporate Governance




2.1 Defining Corporate Governance




There are many different definitions of corporate governance. This paper follows the generally
accepted definition by Cadbury (1992). Corporate governance is `the system by which companies
are directed and controlled'. The reason behind this system is to ensure value creation (Thomsen
2008, 240).




2.2. Agency Theory




The theory of the firms suggests that firm exist and make decisions in order to maximize their
profits. Good management is vital to economic efficiency, productivity, firm performance, and
social welfare. (Thomsen 2008, 21). Therefore owners (shareholders) hire executives to manage
companies on their behalf (Thomsen 2008, 17). According to Ross (1973) "an agency
relationship has arisen between two (or more) parties when one, designated as the agent, acts for,
or on behalf of, or as a representative for the other, designated the principal, in a particular
domain of decision problems". Agency problems arise because the agents (managers) do not always
act in the interests of the principal (shareholders) (Thomsen 2008, 31).




2.3. Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection




According to Holmström a problem of moral hazard may arise when individuals engage in risk
sharing under conditions such that their privately taken actions affect the probability distribution of
the outcome. The source of this moral hazard is an asymmetry of information among individuals
that results because individual actions cannot be observed and hence contracted upon by the
principal (Holmström 1979,2).

Hidden knowledge ­ adverse selection ­ occurs when there is some element in the situation which
is known to the agent but not to the principal. (Thomsen 2008, 34).

A timeline can be drawn to distinguish between these information problems. Adverse selection
problems tend to occur before the principal is to make a decision and moral hazard problems tend to
occur after the decision. (Thomsen 2008, 32.)

According to Thomsen (2008) two important tasks are needed to complete in order to ensure good
management of the company, the most important task in corporate governance. Selection includes
hiring the right managers and replacing bad ones, if necessary. The problem behind selection is
adverse selection. The second task is motivation. Management should be encouraged to do their
best through incentives and monitoring. The key problem here is moral hazard.




3. The Mechanisms of Corporate Governance




Considering agency relationships, the central corporate governance problem is how managers are
controlled. Thomsen (2008) has listed the most important corporate governance mechanisms: moral
standards, reputation and trust, legal protection, large owners, shareholder pressure, boards, creditor
monitoring incentive systems, auditors, analysts, takeovers, competition, managerial labour market,
codes, and media pressure. They all serve to mitigate agency problems and ensure that managers
manage the company in shareholders best interest. Thomsen (2008) argues that "good corporate
governance essentially consists of tailoring these mechanisms to the individual firm."




4.1. Ethics as a Corporate Governance Mechanism




Thomsen (2008) defines ethical codes as a set of principles which govern economic behavior and
which may function as a correction to market and policy failures as well as failure of the prevailing
social ethic to achieve socially optimal outcomes and distinguishes ethical business codes adopted
by an individual corporation from general ethical codes expressed in the prevailing social ethic.
Ethical business codes should be consisted with profit maximization. However the codes can limit
the range of acceptable activities, and be considered to be inconsistent with profit maximization
since a profit maximizing firm will offer the same opportunities for profit as an ethically-
constrained firm. Moreover the additional opportunities may arise from the option to be unethical.
An implication is that business managers may find it in their interest to mimic ethical behavior to
the extent that the public cannot distinguish between honesty and dishonesty. Harrington (1989)
and Frank (1989) state that it will be interest of the profit maximizing firm to signal a commitment
to ethical values if signaling costs are small and if this is perceived to have a positive financial
effect. By preventing illegal activities ethical business codes can add value and improve social well
being if they concentrate on issues which are specific to individual firm.




4. Corporate Governance in Japan




Charkham (1995) argues that Japanese corporate governance is shaped by mutual obligations
between the company and its employee, a strong corporate family feeling, and decision based on
consensus and social responsibility. Japanese corporate governance differs from continental
Europe, UK and US. Special characteristics include Keiretsus (company groups), bank finance, the
board system, employee relations, government intervention, incentive pay, and company law.
Keiretsus are the dominant ownership mode, especially for large listed companies. Companies form
a large company group. The companies hold plenty of shares in each other to prevent hostile
takeovers. Japanese companies use rather bank finance than equity finance. The main banks are
reported to play a leading role in many Keiretsus. The board system is one tier. (Thomsen 2008,
200-201.) Shareholders elect the board, which appoints the executives. The difference to two tier
board system is that there is no supervisory board which evaluates company performance. One tier
boards can run the company on their own. (Thomsen 2008, 67.) However, according to Aoki (1988)
the banks step in and lead rescue operation in times of crises. Labor markets are inflexible and
employee relations are characterized by long-term, often lifetime employment. Japanese managers
tend to work in the same company throughout their entire careers. Employees in the same company
are usually members of the same enterprise union, not trade unions. Incentive pay level is lower
than in the US and it is seems to be determined more by seniority than performance. However,
company-wide bonus systems for all employees provide incentives. Government intervention plays
a key role in Japanese society. For example large parts of Japanese businesses are protected from
international competition by tariffs. Company law is in the civil law tradition. Japan scores highly
on formal measures of investor protection, but lacks on level of shareholder influence. For example
Japanese companies are famous for holding their annual meetings on the same day and keeping
them short which effectively prevent small shareholders from attending to most of them. (Thomsen
2008, 201.)




5. Tobashi Scheme




In April 1992 The New York Times published a story about a financial scheme designed for
privileged customers. It is so well known in the Japanese stock market that it has a nickname,
Tobashi, or "flying". "An official of the Daiwa Securities Company, Japan's second-largest
brokerage house, had approached a prominent corporation, Tokyu Department Store, and
proposed that Tokyu pay 90.5 billion yen (about $675 million) for securities whose market value
was only 30 billion yen. According to Tokyu, Daiwa promised it would repurchase the securities
later, at a price that would guarantee Tokyu a small profit." In other words a broker spares a
customer, whose securities have dropped in value, from having to show the losses in its balance
sheet by arranging another customer to purchase these securities at an unrealistically high price.
When the accounting period is about to end, a new purchaser is persuaded to go along with an
increasingly inflated price. The broker guarantees a profit no matter what happen to the market
value of the securities. In the ideal world the stocks "fly" from account to account until the market
rises enough and the market value of the securities is finally the same as the last rigged trade.
However this was not the case. In April 1992 the New York Times wrote: `...Daiwa refused to
repurchase the securities at the promised value.' The Tokyo stock market crashed when the largest
investors pulled their investments back. The New York Times had doubts about the Tokyo stock
market: "No one knows if the Tokyo Stock Exchange will return to what it was before its slow-
motion collapse."



5.1. "Bing Bang Reforms of Accounting Standards"


Japanese Accounting Standards have been greatly changed. Japan's financial regulator finally
outlawed Tobashi schemes in 2000. New market-to-market accounting rules were introduced,
requiring companies to account for securities at market value instead of at their purchase price.
(Layne et al. 2011, 4) Large companies have also been supposed to disclose consolidated financial
statements as formal documents and introduce consolidated statements of cash flow and tax
consequences accounting. The purpose of these changes was to push the management of Japanese
enterprise to shift their focus from unrealized profits/losses to cash flow generated by their assets
and improve efficiency of capital. The chances were also expected to attract foreign enterprises and
investors to make transactions in capital markets in Japan. (Asaki 2006, 235.)


6. The Decades-long Cover-up of Losses at Olympus Corporation


In November 2011 The Financial Times published a story which shone a harsh light on Japanese
corporate governance. Olympus, established 1919, the world's biggest maker of endoscopes and a
top producer of cameras, admitted wrongdoing for the first time in a scandal involving more than
$1.7 billion in acquisition-related payments and advisory fees. The money was used secretly to
cover losses on investments dating back to the early 1990s. According to the Wall Street Journal
the scandal was "one of the biggest and longest-running loss-hiding arrangements in Japanese
corporate history." At its center were an inner circle of Olympus executives, who sought to delay
the reckoning of the losses. Olympus practiced the art of "tobashi", accounting maneuvers that
would make problems "fly away" of balance sheets.


6.1. Financial Engineering
In the 1980s investment bankers gained riches and new respect in Japanese society as the Nikkei
stock average roared to new heights. However manufacturer exporters, the engine of the Japanese
economic miracle, did not want to tie their fate to the mercurial financial markets. That mindset
changed in September 1985, when major industrial powers agreed to devaluate the dollar. The yen
sharply appreciated, cutting Olympus operating profits in half. Suddenly the idea of using financial
engineering, called zaitech, to pad earnings by non-operating income made sense to Toshiro
Shimoyama, Olympus president, 1984-1993. "Until last year I was against zaitech, but conditions
are changed", he told Nikkei Industrial Daily in November 1986. In consequence Hideo Yamada
and Hisashi Mori, managers in Olympus finance department, started pouring money in to riskier
securities through Akio Nakagawa, famous Japanese banker. "Nagasawa was a genious when it
came to persuading people in the finance department." Said an ex-colleque. "He convinced them it
was the job of finance department to create more money by investing the company's funds, and told
them they should do that aggressively because it was their core business." On the final trading day
of 1989 the Nikkei average peaked and went to a tail spin, losing nearly 40 percent the following.
Stock portfolios across the corporate sector were crushed. By the mid-1990s the losses had grown to
tens of billions yen. The financial health of the company was threatened. To hide the deficit,
Olympus signed a contract with Credit Suisse First Boston for tobashi scheme to cover up securities
losses in 1992. Bad securities were sold by book value to trust of Olympus's balance sheet. (Layne
et al. 2011, 3.)

