Finnish Film Director Agreements

I       INTRODUCTION


        The director of a film, documentary or fiction, is an author in the meaning of the
Finnish Copyright Act and has in accordance with the said act copyright to his/her artistic
work. A film is an artistic vision of its director. With a film director agreement, the
director assigns the economical rights to such artistic work to a producer against
compensation. Pursuant to the principle of contractual freedom, the parties are free to
agree on the terms of such agreement (unless compulsory terms are deriving from the
law).


        The recent development in the film industry has been rapid and the importance of
the industry has grown during the past years. This applies also to the contract praxis.
Therefore more and more legal aid is needed by the contract parties when negotiating on
the making of a new film. The Association of Finnish Film Directors (in Finnish: Suomen
elokuvaohjaajaliitto SELO ry.) acts in Finland as a promoter of the interests of Finnish
film directors and provides support to its members in agreement negotiations. An
important part of the legal consultation consists of the film director model agreements for
fiction, television and short films as well as for documentaries providing a starting point
for the agreement negotiations. Secondly, the model agreement serves as a director's
check list of things to be carefully considered, when agreeing on the assignment of
copyright. Thus, model agreements are intended to serve as practical tools for the
members of SELO in their agreement negotiations. The models have been continuously
updated to better reflect changes in both legal framework as well as market practices.


        Due to the limited financial means of SELO, it has proven difficult to employ
required resources in active monitoring of the development in the field of copyright and
contract law at the national and particularly at the international level. Furthermore, no
academic analysis of the content of the model agreements has been carried out. This
paper analyses one of the film director model agreements and its clauses relating to the
assignment of copyright. Moreover, the paper identifies the actual legal framework (the
Finnish Copyright Act, in specific) behind those agreement clauses, and also clarifies the
current praxis in the field, which has undoubtedly influenced the formulation of the
model agreement. Furthermore, this paper is also intended to serve a more extensive
study of the European film director agreement models to be carried out as a comparative
study of different agreement clauses and practices. Hence, this paper also contributes to
understanding how the current Finnish model agreement is structured creating a base to
the such subsequent study.


       The findings are assumed to suggest that the clauses in the model agreement
derive largely from the law but are also motivated by political goals and trade-union-like
recommendations for the members of SELO, financial circumstances, as well as the
market practices.


       The paper is organised into seven sections. The introductory section is followed
by a literature review in section II. The theoretical framework is presented in section III
and the material used as a basis for this term paper is described in section IV. The
analysis part in section V consists of the overview of the Finnish film director model
agreement as well as takes a closer look to the individual clauses of the model agreement.
Discussion is opened and proposal for later study is presented in section VI. The
concluding section VII summarises the findings and defines the paper's contributions to
the above-mentioned later study.

II         LITERATURE REVIEW


           Assignment of copyright is included as a standard chapter in every general
academic book on intellectual property rights1. The legal issues relating to copyright
assignments are not that complex. In addition, there exist some legal praxis that define
the director as a primary author of a cinematographic work2.


           The interpretation of contracts may, however, be subject to disputes. The contract
law derives its norms from 1. mandatory legislation, 2. contract terms and related
material, 3. non-mandatory legislation and comparative contractual principles, and 4.
market practices. Although no binding norms on the interpretation of contracts exist, the
academic literature provides some rules for this. The interpretation of contracts may base
on the material produced by the parties as well as their actions and their common
purpose. The interpretation can also base on the actual wording of the agreement. The
normative interpretation derives from the wording of the acts.


           A film director agreement can be analysed by using such academic literature on
intellectual property assignments as well as general contract law. However, it should be
kept in mind that the film director agreement is not only a contract on copyright
assignment but also it is an employment contract (see section V. on compensation
structure). Thirdly, a relevant employment legislation and literature may thus have
relevance. In addition to academic literature, the material produced in the field (e.g.
SELO's different reports and statements to legislative reforms) plays an important role in
analysing the agreement model.


       As the term paper analyses a specific agreement, the aforementioned existing
literature serves only as theoretical framework. However, the emphasis of this term paper
is on intellectual property issues, the general contract law issues and the theoretical rules
on interpretation of contracts are not presented in more detailed level. The theoretical
framework on the part of the copyright is presented more detail in the following section.
                                                                                                          

III        THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK


III.1      Protection of the Film Director's Right to the Work by Copyright


           The director of a film is an author of the final artistic work and his/her right to get
compensated for the exploitation of such work is protected by copyright. In fact,
copyright was originally intended for the protection of authors, artists and composers and
the primarily functions of copyright laws even today is "to protect from exploitation by
other people the fruits of a someone's work, labour, skill or taste". As other IP rights, a
copyright is thus an exclusive right giving the holder of a copyright right to prevent
others from using his/her work without an adequate consent. In other words, the
copyright protection is "given by making it unlawful, as an "infringement of a copyright,"
to reproduce or copy, for example, any "literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work"
without permission of the author. In short, copyright protection provides that the author
has a right to get paid for his/her work. In Finland, an author is granted the exclusivity to
the work by the virtue of Section 2 of the Copyright Act.


         The copyright is granted to the author of an artistic work. This means that the
copyright is always originally granted to a natural person at the moment the work is
created. The copyright, in contrast to the industrial rights, does not require registration in
order to be effective toward others.


         Copyright may also be granted simultaneously to many people. A "cinematographic
work" is the most common example of a work that has been created by multiple


individuals, namely a director, scriptwriter, composer of the music, photographer,
scenographer etc. It is controversial, whom of these are to be considered as "authors".
Consequently, it is not clear, whether a cinematographic work is a joint work (as defined
in Section 6) or compilation work (Section 5). However, as a copyright is a transferable
right10, defining the authors of a film is not that big problem in practice as, based on the
aforedescribed, one could think. This is because the individuals participating in the film
making transfer their rights for the normal exploitation of the film to a producer.


           Copyright consists of group of rights that can be divided into economic rights and
moral rights. Economic rights include 1) making copies of the work, and 2) making it
available to the public. Moral rights aim to protect the author's person. Those include 1)
the right of paternity and 2) the right to the integrity of the work.


           The term for the copyright protection of "...a cinematographic work shall subsist
until seventy years have elapsed from the year of the death of the last of the following to
survive: the principal director, the author of the screenplay, the author of the dialogue and
the composer of music specifically created for use in the cinematographic work."




IV         MATERIAL


           The qualitative data consists of SELO's model agreement14 as well as legislation
(acts and preparatory works), and related academic literature (see section II). This data is
supplemented by information obtained from the interviews on the market practices with
SELO's executive director and lawyer.


V           ANALYSIS


V.1         The General Structure of the Finnish Film Director Model Agreement


            As copyright is intangible right i.e. there is nothing tangible assets that a film
director could sell, transactions concerning copyright are entirely contractual matters.
The contract parties have therefore an extensive freedom to agree on the terms of the
assignment of the film director's prevention right.


            The contract clauses of an IP related contract can be divided roughly to those
relating to intellectual property law (e.g. copyright), civil law (the rights and obligations
of the contract parties), and procedure (i.e. dispute resolution) as well as international
private law (when contract has an international dimension).


            The Finnish film director model agreement consist of the following sections: 1)
The object of the agreement, 2) the rights and obligations of the director, 3) assigned
rights, 4) compensations, 5) the moral rights of the director, 6) the obligations of the
producer, 7) marketing of the film, 8) termination of the agreement, 9) jurisdiction and
applicable law, and 10) signatures. The general terms relating to the contract technique in
the film director model agreement are the defining of the contract parties (i.e. the film
director as assignor and the producer as assignee) as well as the signatures part including
the number of the contract copies, date and place. Other information of technical nature is
included e.g. in defining the object of the agreement (e.g. the material the film shall be
filmed on). Clauses under section "jurisdiction and applicable law" represent procedural
aspects of the agreement. More profound analysis of such technical or standard clauses is
not necessary in this context.


V.2        Assigned Economic Rights


           The most essential clauses in the model agreement relate to the assigning of the
economic rights. As the contract parties can freely agree on to what extent the economic
rights are assigned to the producer, the rights that are not expressly mentioned in the
agreement will not efficiently assign to the producer but remain with the original
copyright holder i.e. the director.


           Pursuant to clause 3.1 of the model agreement "[t]he Director assigns to the
Producer against compensation agreed in this agreement the economic rights specified
below." Pursuant to clause 3.2 "[t]he Producer has a right to record the Film on film or on
any other material, show and distribute the Film to the public, make copies of it and
transfer it on another record. [.....] The producer will have by virtue of this agreement
rental, lending, and selling rights to the Film." Furthermore, "[t]he production company
will have a right to make trailers of the Film, advertisements as well as corresponding
marketing and press materials which shall be approved by the Director."


           The assignment of copyright could also be formulated as an "total assignment"
meaning that the author assigns all economic rights to the work to the assignee covering
all forms of usage, even the future ones. However, when assigning all economic rights the
author can not be aware of all rights he/she waives and what the agreement really means
to him/her. In addition, in the situation of total assignment the author will loose the right
to later compensation on possible new forms of usage by the producer. Consequently, the
model agreement lists exclusively the permitted forms of usage so all other ways
economically benefit from the film are left with the director and subject to further
negotiations. To be on the safe side, it is stated in clause 3.5 of the model agreement that
"[s]uch rights, that are not expressly assigned with this agreement, shall remain with the
Director." Also, "[t]he remake rights and by-products will be agreed separately." The
door is left open for the director to get additional compensation for later usage.


           The producer is entitled to further assign the rights and obligations that are
transferred to it provided that the terms of the agreement shall be complied and the
director will be informed of such re-assignment (clause 3.7 of the model agreement). The
producer's right to re-transfer the copyright is subject to such express agreement as it is
otherwise prohibited by the Copyright Act. In addition, the producer may not alter the
work without the director's consent. Therefore it is agreed in the model agreement, that
the director shall approve the new version of the work, which is created upon transferring
the film on other material23. However, this does not mean right to alter the work in such
way that is protected by the director's moral rights (see below).


V.2        The Moral Rights of the Director


           The moral rights can not be efficiently fully assigned. This means that even the
copyright has been transferred, the transferee will still have to respect the author's right
of paternity and the right to the integrity of the work.24 The right of paternity means that
general adjustment provision is added in the Copyright Act in order to protect an author from grossly unfair
contract terms. See e.g. Haarman (1994), p. 71.
the name of the author shall be stated when copies of a work are made or when the work
is made available to the public. The right to the integrity of the work bears that "[a] work
may not be altered in a manner which is prejudicial to the author's literary or artistic
reputation, or to his individuality; nor may it be made available to the public in such a
form or context as to prejudice the author in the manner stated."


           Although the moral rights are directly provided by the virtue of the law and as
stated above those can not be fully assigned, the moral rights of the director are also
written down in the model agreement. Clause 5.1 provides that "[t]he name of the
Director shall be stated when showing the to the public or distributing the Film, unless
otherwise wanted by the Director." The later part refers to the fact that the right of
paternity include also the right to have a work published anonymously or
pseudonymously.


           The right to the integrity of the work is stated in the model agreement in the form
that "[t]he final form of the Film may not be altered nor it may be cut up or showed in
parts, unless otherwise agreed, without the Director's prior written consent." In
addition, "[t]he Film may not be showed or distributed in such contexts which can be
prejudicial to the Director's artistic or professional merits or reputation. Thus, the
wording of the latter clause derives almost identically from the law.


           In addition, the interpretation that a film is characteristically an artistic work of its
director and thus relating strongly to the director's person is supported by the wording of
the model agreement. It is expressly included in the model agreement that the director
shall have the right to show the film to the public at festivals and corresponding non-
commercial events for the purpose of promoting his/ her artistic career.

V.3        Compensation


           It is not stipulated in the Copyright Act that what kind of compensation the author
should get against the assignment of copyright. Therefore, the clauses of the film director
agreement that are most subject to the outcome of the negotiations, the different goals of
the contract parties, and the market practices are those relating to the compensation.
Should the producer fail to pay all the agreed compensations, the assigned rights shall
transfer back to the director.


                    The recommendation by SELO included in the model agreement for the
film director's total compensation consists of 1) salary and 2) compensation for the
assignment of the copyright (royalties). The third part of the compensation consist of
compensating the travelling and mobile phone expenses that occur for the making the
film. Furthermore, the prices granted for the film shall belong to the director.


         Film contracts are governed by Section 39 of the Copyright Act. Pursuant to the
said section "transfer of the right to make a film on the basis of [...] artistic work shall
comprise the right to make the work available to the public by showing the film in
cinemas, on television or by any other means, and the right to provide the film with
subtitles and to dub the film in another language." This "filming right" deriving directly
from the law has been interpreted as a minimum level of the rights to be assigned to the
producer and it is compensated with the salary. The salary part covers also the director's
work related to prearrangements, filming period, afterworks and participation in the
marketing. The amount of the salary is subject to the negotiations and therefore left blanc
in the model agreement. The film director agreement is also an employment contract as
there is an employment relationship between the director and the producer.


         Assigned rights exceeding such minimum level shall be subject to separate
copyright compensation in a form of e.g. royalties. In accordance with the model
agreement, the producer will have to pay royalties on:
                      distribution to cinemas eur 0.20 per viewer after [number to be
                           agreed] viewers,
                      DVD, Blueray, VHS or other copy sale eur 0.60 per copy,
                      foreign sale 5% of the gross income gained by the producer, and
                      other domestic sale 5% of the gross income gained by the producer.


         In short, distribution right is not included in the minimum level and has to be
separately compensated for the director. In order to monitor the right amount of royalties,
the director should always be entitled to receive a copy of bookkeeping materials and
auditor's statement concerning the film and get information on agreements relating to the
use of the film. This right is covered by the clause 4.3 of the model agreement.


         Against the aforedescribed compensation structure it is understandable, that SELO
has objected the legislative reform of taking employment assumption37 in the Copyright
Act. The royalties make an important part of the total compensation and as the
employment relationship with the producer lasts only for a short term, the royalties
provide the director with income for several years (depending on the economic success of
that film) after the termination of the employment. The employment assumption would
deteriorate the negotiation position of a film director by reducing the produce's
willingness to negotiate on separate compensations for the transfer of copyright. It is also
important to secure the director's copyright to the work in situations where the agreement
is ambiguous or remains silent.

VI         DISCUSSION


           The trend in the film director agreement negotiations has been that the agreement
models introduced by the producers derives from the Anglo-Saxon contract tradition.
When a Finnish film director agreement is build on such grounds by translating a foreign
contract into Finnish, it is possible that the final agreement contains provisions that are
not suitable to Finnish legal environment. This comes up especially with regard to
terminology used in the Anglo-Saxon based contract that don't necessarily have
counterwords when translated into Finnish. More alerting is that also the legal concepts
included in such contracts may be "legal aliens" in domestic legal praxis Consequently,
the risk for misunderstandings and disputes increases. SELO's model agreement can be
therefore a very useful alternative for the director, usually representing the weaker party
in agreement negotiations, to counteroffer for the producer as a starting point. And
although this would not be successful, it could be wise at least to compare the producer's
suggestion for the terms to those of the model agreement.


           The European roof organisation for the film director associations (FERA) has
planned to draft an agreement check list which has intended to serve as a general starting
level for film director agreements in whole of Europe. Thus, new material for a
comparative study on European copyright40 and contract culture will be available and
niche for a later study exists.41 At the more practical level, a harmonised European
recommendation strengthens further the director's negotiation position.

 VII    CONCLUSION

       It has been said, that a good contract is one that neither party is fully content but
both parties can live with. Thus, it should be kept in mind that the model agreement
provided for its members by the Association of Finnish Film Directors (SELO) is just a
recommendation and has no binding effect in the "inter partes" negotiations. Therefore,
the final film director agreement may be quite different from the model agreement and at
least partly depend on the negotiation positions of the parties. In addition, the model
agreement represents the interest of the directors and the producer's interests are not
included in this starting point. The director can therefore be content if the terms of the
final agreement come close to the model agreement's terms.


       As it has been presented in this term paper that most of SELO's model
agreement's clauses relating to the assignment of the copyright and the moral rights of
the director derive directly from the law or have a legal background in the Copyright Act.
The Copyright Act represents mostly non-mandatory legislation and its provisions shall
prevail only if not otherwise agreed. Therefore the also the clauses having a legal
background in the Copyright Act are subject to the negotiation outcome. The clauses that
have most variation in different final agreements are the compensation clauses. It would
therefore prove to be interesting to compare the compensation structures and levels in
different European countries as the praxis relating to compensation is not deriving
directly from the law but variation between the countries is expected. The compensation
issues are also outside the scope of EU-level harmonisation.

