Exploring the Opportunities of an Aging Workforce: Motivating Older Employees to a Longer Working Life

1 Introduction
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in the possibilities of HR practises with which to promote the work of older employees in organizations. The well-known phenomena of demographical change and its impact on the labour force have centred the attention of many researchers to the questions regarding employee well-being, motivation and retention. Knowledge of ways to enhance the well-being of older employees and motivational issues regarding the retention of key personell has great importance for HR professionals and also companies in general.

The common assumption among many organizations has until recent years been that older workers are easily dispensable, much more expensive, and add less value to the organization than their younger co-workers. With the prospective and perhaps already prevailing skill-shortage, many organizations have been forced to reconsider their attitudes towards aging employees. According to Peeters and van Emmerik (2008) the current literature suggests that the age related changes in well-being of older workers is not as negative as was thought in earlier research on the topic. There is now much evidence that supports a more positive view of the older worker and encourages both researchers and practitioners to “shift the focus from managing threats to creating opportunities”. (Peeters and van Emmerik: 2008)

Kanfer and Ackerman (2004) concluded based on their research that there is neither theoretical justification nor empirical evidence supporting an unavoidable decline in work motivation with growing age. Instead they suggest that the same basic principles of work motivation are valid for both employees in mid-life/later years as in young adulthood. According to them, the key to motivation is the allocation of an individual’s resources to such work behaviours that promote the personal competencies, sense of self-efficacy and self-concept with which to attain desired work outcomes. Furthermore Kanfer and Ackerman (2004) argue that the effect of aging on motivation is mostly dependant on work circumstances. Therefore it is of interest to further explore the ways in which the motivation of older employees can be enhanced through different organizational strategies and managerial practises as also Kanfer and Ackerman (2008) suggest.

1.1 Practical relevance
Companies in general know very well how important it is to invest in the well-being of the employees and that these investments according to research pay off also in economic terms. Furthermore, a whole new market has been established for firms that provide services within the work well-being sector. One critical point for managers and hrm professionals is therefore to have knowledge of what actually works and which are the concrete measures that are needed in order to support aging workers in their work life. Because of this lack of knowledge it is of practical relevance that also researchers give their attention to the issue and form a clear theoretical framework for discussing the influence of motivational factors on the retention of older employees.

1.2 Purpose
The purpose of this paper is to examine the most important motivational factors that affect the retention of aging workers. Furthermore it seeks to summarize the surveyed literature in order to create an organizing framework that would help to guideline future empirical research on the topic.

1.3 Definitions
This paper focuses specifically on the motivation of older employees. There is a vast amount of literature discussing the various different aspects of age, work, and well-being and their effect on employee retention, but to narrow down the research topic I have chosen to consentrate on the motivational factors that influence employee retention. Belove the most important terms for the paper will be defined.
Older employee (older worker, aging employee):


1.4 Structure and approach
The paper is divided into three parts according to the main themes of current research literature in the field. It starts with a conzeptualization of what work motivation is and what the different aspects of work motivation are that should be considered when discussing its cosnsequences on work. The second part deals more specifically with the effect of aging on motivation. The last part of the literature survey focuses on the practical implications of the theories of aging and motivation on the daily work of HR professionals, providing concrete measures for motivating older employees to work longer and retire later. This is done by a literature survey of the recent and central literature in the field.

2 Motivating older employees

introduction into the topic more specificly (metatext)

2.1 Conzeptualizing work motivation

idependent and dependant variable

2.2 The effect of aging on motivation

pulling and pushing factors

2.3 Practical implications for HR professionals

flexibility in HR policies
attitude change
knowlege transfer programs

3 Discussion and Conclusions 

