Family business in the third generation: factors of the survival

Introduction
Family business is rather old and widespread form of business. As every other type of companies private owned firms have their lifecycle. However particularity of occurrence of such companies and their governance that carried out by founders and their family members makes the approach of running these companies to be different from the classic theory of corporate governance. The critical point for a family company comes when the third generation of the family replaces the company’s previous governance. At this stage of a family company’s lifecycle the death rate for companies is very high. Only 30 percent of family owned companies survive to the second generation and only 12 percent survive to the third generation (Adamson, 2005). In European business society there is even a saying for this case: “The first generation creates, the second inherits, and the third destroys” (Magretta 1998).
The main reason for failure in the third generation is a lack of understanding of a firm’s business by new governance and management teams along with different incentives for running this business. There are a lot of case studies devoted to successful and failed strategies of family owned companies being analyzed and discussed in academic journals, management magazines, and other strategic management issues. Mostly these articles discuss family companies’ structure, decision making process, the succession process, and process of planning of the succession. The process of transferring a family business from the founder to the second generation is one of the subjects that get much attention from researchers due to the critical moment of the founder’s retirement and giving up the business to the next generation. However the succession process towards the third generation is studied only within the bounds of investigation of the succession process as a whole. Nevertheless percent of companies that survive after the second generation still decreases. Obviously, much of a company’s performance in the third generation depends on what is being done by previous generations and how it is being transferred to the third generation team. Therefore, in order to investigate conditions which provide success for a family company in the long run, factors that affect family business during the third generation must be examined.
For the purpose of this term paper overview of previous investigations on family business companies’ experience, their succession process, and roles of family business members are used. Due to other initial purposes of used books and articles rather than examining the family business at its third generation, an attempt to structure main factors which affected the business at this stage will be made. The results of the current paper may be used for holding further empirical research by formulating hypotheses, interviewing family businesses, and carrying statistical analysis of the gathered data. 
The paper is structured as follows: the first part is devoted to overview of the theoretical framework related to family business. Then research articles on different aspects of family business and its succession process are considered in order to define factors which may affects family business in the third generation. In the remainder of the paper an attempt to structure factors that affected the companies’ performance is made along with discussions and proposals for further research.
Governance of family business and its development: theoretical overview
The main reason why family business is discussed and researched is its complex and specific scheme of relationships between family business members. The three-circle model of family business was developed in order to understand these relationships and define origins of interpersonal and role problems emerging during running family business (Figure 1).
[Figure]
From the model it can be seen that family business system has three main subsystems which are independent but overlap all each other. Thus all actors who are related to the family business can be divided into seven groups. Different roles and behavior correspond to every particular group. Defining a place to which an individual belongs will help to understand his or her incentives to behave in particular way and to make decisions. Obviously, more complicated problems occur, when an individual corresponds not to a single group but to two or even three groups. This is also one of the reasons why family business attracts attention from psychologists and sociologists (Gersick et al., 1997): the person who is a family member and an owner or especially a management member faces the dilemma of making best decisions for his/her family and for the business.
While developing a family business changes all the time in terms of changes in the family, the ownership structure, and the management. Consequently, the three-cycle model should be used taking into account these characteristics of the family business at a specific stage of its development. From this perspective, by the third generation family business represents much more complex system than it does at the moment of its creation. In order to understand how every subsystem changes the three-dimensional developmental model was built (Figure 2).
[Figure]
The three-dimensional developmental model shows stages through which every circle moves during the family business development. It is not necessary that a circle starts its moving from the first stage indicated in this model: with all variations of forms and structures a family business can begin its development from different points of every dimension. Therefore, evaluating and analysis of a family business should be started from defining on which stage the family business is from every of the three dimensions’ perspectives.
It may seem that a family owned firm reached the third generation cannot be placed on a first stage of some dimensions. However, deeper analysis of the business may prove this conclusion is not well-grounded. For example, the first stage of the family circle – Young Business Family – refers to the period when a generation is on its initial phase of development: decisions about relationship between work and family and about working relationship with the extended family are taken (Gersick, 1997). In other words, this stage is typical as for the first generation when a family business emerges as for the third generation when younger family members come to the business. In fact, by the third generation, when a family reproduces itself continually, there may be complex relationships between different generations at their different stages of lifecycle. The first stage of the business dimension – Start-Up – may take place in the third generation when the family business’s core activity is reconsidered due to changed market demand or some sudden events. At the first stage of ownership – Controlling Owner, – when ownership is controlled by an individual or a couple, family business may stay for a long time due to family objectives and values. Some statistical data and experience demonstrate that family businesses at this ownership structure perform better in the long run (Gersick, 1997; Magretta, 1998). Therefore, analyzing a family business being in its third generation every stage of every dimension should be taken into account. 

Multi-entity roles of family business members and the succession process as main factors of success in the third generation
Succession process is considered as one of the biggest obstacle in development of a family business and, as a result, the most frequent reason of family companies’ death (Gersick et al, 1997; Carlock and Ward, 2001; Adamson, 2005; Laakkonen and Kansikas, 2011; Lam, 2011; Van der Merwe et al., 2009). As Van der Merwe et al. (2009) indicate in their article: “The easier and more successful the transition is, the better the chances of survival and long-term profitability.” Consequently, great amount of studies and researches is devoted to investigation of this process, but mostly the process of transferring of a family business from the first generation to the second is considered because at this stage the governance of the business goes from the founder to another family or non-family member. The succession process as every process in business should be planned in order to be successfully completed: “One of the most significant factors determining the continuity prospects of the family business from one generation to the next is whether the succession process is properly planned” (Van der Merwe et al., 2009). Therefore, this process should take place in strategic planning of a company (Carlock and Ward, 2001). 
Results of some investigations showed that many family-owned companies do not have the succession process plan but only have some thoughts about how they will transfer the business to the next generation (Van der Merwe et al, 2009; Laakkonen and Kansikas, 2011). Moreover, some researchers’ experience showed that “the term of “succession” was not a topic that the informants liked to discuss, which confirms findings that succession is a taboo subject in family business” (Lam, 2011). These facts indicate that in order to complete the succession process the plan of the succession not only should exist but must be written and accessible for key stakeholders of the family company (Van der Merwe et al., 2009).
The properly planned succession should clarify a proper person for the succession – a successor. The succession plan should identify criteria of selection of a successor with indicating main competences which a new leader needs to have in order to provide “a smooth transition of leadership between generations.” (Van der Merwe et al., 2009). The research held by Van der Merwe et al. (2009) confirms the positive influence of management succession planning, suitability of prospective successor and positive view of the expected outcome of succession on family businesses’ performance during the succession process: “the more succession planning takes place and the better the perceived suitability of the successor, the better the expected outcome of the succession will be.” What is interesting for the purpose of this research is that no significant relationship between these variables and generation of family employees was found. This means that succession planning is important issue at every stage of the family business development regardless of the generation it is governed by. At the same time practice shows that the second- and the third-generation family companies make succession plans much more often and properly than the first generation businesses (Laakkonen and Kansikas, 2011). Recommendations following from the results of the research mentioned above are to start planning as early as possible, to create a team for planning of the management succession, and to discuss these issues regularly during family business meetings (Van der Merwe, 2009). These recommendations may be confidently considered as factors for the succession from the second to the third generation.
Along with strategic planning of the succession process evolutionary process of changes in ownership and management should be considered for better understanding of some aspects of this process and, as a consequence, for better planning. Laakkonen and Kansikas (2011) in their article indicate evolutionary forces which influence family business.
The major forces they define are selection and variation. Evolutionary variation includes such changes in the business as modifications in production, working styles, and customer relationships. Evolutionary selection relates to what a family business selects, in other words it is about human decision making. Both these forces cause variation that can be a crucial factor for a family business’s success. Although the research of Laakkonen and Kansikas (2011) is mostly devoted to the transition from the founder to the younger generation, what is typical for transition from the first generation to the second, it also makes some implications for analysis of the transition process from the second generation to the third. Evolutionary forces are unique for every family business and they may be influenced by both the founder and the next generations. During the succession knowledge and generational expertise are transferred, but new evolutionary routines have to be developed by the new generation in order to create variation and sustain competiveness of the family business (Laakkonen and Kansikas, 2011). For the successful transferring a family business to the next generation, self-motivation and commitment to take responsibility from a successor are needed: “When the next generation is not committed to taking charge over the business the likelihood of succession failure increases.” The research of Laakkonen and Kansikas showed that “lack of resources as well as lack of external expertise can constitute a drawback to evolution” as outside expertise can increase variation and selection in the business. The founder management may demonstrate a high level of influence what increases the risk for failure for the next generation. For the purpose of this paper this influence is also significant, because if it takes place in the succession to the second generation, then the risk of transferring old routines to the third generation is high. As a result, failures in variation and selection can cause failure in the succession process. It also should be mentioned that the founder’s presence still can take place in the third generation (in case of multigenerational governance); therefore, level of influence of the founder and evolutionary routines should be properly analyzed.
As it was mentioned above, different roles of individuals who are related to the family business play crucial role in the whole process of running the business. Likewise family business members play different roles in the succession process, that can be characterized as “a complex, dynamic process which may take place over several years.” (Lam, 2011). Lam in his article (2011) reviews different approaches that describe a role of a successor, self-identification of the person, forces that influence this role, and stages of the person’s changing sense of self. His research based on long-term contacts with a number of Chinese family companies demonstrated that “the main issue giving rise to the failure of succession is family business members’ collective lack of a shared understanding about succession process”. It can be seen from his research that there is discrepancy between what the founders and the successors say and what they actually do. It is argued by the researcher that the reason of that lies in individuals’ “multi-entity roles” which they are playing simultaneously. It may cause serious problems for the succession process, because “while conflicts between individuals seem to be relatively salient, the conflicts within the individual-self are unspoken and sometimes unnoticed.” (Lam, 2011). Therefore, the critical issue for a successor is to realize his or her different roles in order to avoid some conflicts that may take place in the succession process and after it.
Lussier and Sonfield (2010) held a research that from some perspectives is closely related to the current paper. They tested eleven hypotheses concerning family business’s characteristics at different stages of its development in order to define similarities and differences between the three generations. The sample included six countries in order to investigate family businesses from significantly different cultures. The results of the research along with implications to the current study are given below (Table 1).
[Table]
Factors of survival in the third generation
An attempt to structure factors that affected the companies’ performance in the third generation will be made
Conclusion
The results will be discussed, implementation and proposals for further research

