PATENT ENFORCEMENT AS STRATEGIC AND VALUE CREATION TOOL 
1 INTRODUCTION

The main purpose of Intellectual Property Rights (henceforth IPR) is to give an exclusive right to an author or inventor for a certain period of time and at the same time to promote innovation and knowledge transfer. That was a good and noble idea until IPRs became the last legal method for businesses to obtain a monopoly. The enforcement of rights became a strategic tool for generating revenue. Nowadays, some companies are operating in the gray area of Intellectual Property (hereinafter IP) law, exploiting what is legal and what is not by pushing the boundaries, while others are not even aware that they are breaking the law. Beside these companies, there is a new type of companies – non-practicing entities, NPE. These companies are abusing IP rules to make substantial profits.

Technological development has taken a giant leap in the knowledge-based economy which is also seen in the increase of patent filings all over the world. Between 1981 and 2007, there has been a 3.4 per cent increase in patent filings within USPTO. As a result of growth in patenting gives the opportunity for companies to use IPR enforcement as a strategic tool for generating revenue. There have been only handful studies on IPR enforcement strategies which will be mentioned in this paper. 

Traditionally motive for patenting has been to protect the core technology of the company but nowadays it has been shifting from defensive purposes to more offensive and aggressive. That is why there has been recently interest in Patent Trolls who act in offensive ways. There are many opinions whether use detrimental or not which we do not go into deep analysis. This paper examines enforcement of IPRs from economic point of view with a main focus on the role of IP in corporations, especially in those that are strategically enforcing their patents to make profits. It also presents some patenting strategies of different types of companies. 

The paper is organized into three sections. The following section provides a legal framework of IP infringement and enforcement. The second section discusses the economic perspective of the enforcement and how it is used to generate revenues in different companies. The concluding section ties all these together and discusses what might be the effect of “abusing” the IP law.

2 LEGAL FRAMEWORK OF INFRINGEMENT AND ENFORCEMENT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHT 

Intellectual property rights protect ideas and information that have commercial value. The main purpose of a patent is to provide a legal enforceable protection for an invention that satisfies patentability requirements. These criteria are non obviousness, inventive step and industrial applicability.  The right is basically negative: it excludes others from using the right without the consent of the rights holder. In other words it forbids others from copying and, in some cases when the third party has independently reached the same results, exploiting it without the license. 

What is infringement? Infringement has been defined in TRIPS Section 5 Article 28 (1) as following: 
“A patent shall confer on its owner the following exclusive rights: … to prevent third parties not having the owner’s consent from the acts of: making, using, offering for sale, selling, or importing for these purposes that product; … to prevent third parties not having the owner’s consent from the act of using the process, and from the acts of: using, offering for sale, selling, or importing for these purposes at least the product obtained directly by that process.”
In other words, infringement occurs when the third party does not have consent of the rights holder to use the invention in commercial or industrial activities. Prohibited acts could be divided into rough division of: (a) infringement during manufacture (making a patented product); (b) infringement after manufacture (offering, using, importing and keeping for these purposes); (c) infringement after manufacture (exhaustion of rights); (d) before manufacture (“indirect” or other infringement); and (e) new medical and other applications of known substances. Invention does not have to be copied in its entirety; it could be only a part of it to constitute the infringement which can be deliberate or inadvertent.

There are two different kinds of remedies against patent infringement: injunctive relief and damages. Usually when the court grand injunctive relief, it means that infringer must stop producing and/or selling the infringing goods. What comes to damages, there is from two to three “standard methods” for assessing the damages. These are: lost profits, infringer’s profits and an ordinary licensing fee (reasonable royalty). 
How to enforce? When infringement occurs, or there is reasonable ground for suspicion, there are many strategies for legal enforcement of patent rights. These strategies could be characterized in a general term, such as offensive/defensive enforcement, just like in patent strategies. When choosing offensive litigation strategy, assessment of the risks in case of counter-litigation which include of possibly losing some business, should be done. Litigation processes are usually including also contingencies and stages from filing to the final appeals. There is usually three ways in resolving IP related disputes: criminal law, civil law and resolution without litigation which is negotiation, mediation, and arbitration. Mediation and arbitration are usually referred to as “alternative dispute resolution”. In IP disputes, litigation should be regarded as a last resort because they are costly, time consuming, and uncertain. It is also nowadays a requirement that the litigants will first to try to settle the case through negotiation, mediation, or arbitration.  The choice depends on the nature of infringement.
 
As already mentioned, when infringement occurs, the first move depends on the alleged infringer characteristics: what relationship company has with it and what are infringer strengths and weaknesses compared to the company. There are a couple of questions that company could ask: Is infringer going to respond to reasonable negotiations? What is company’s strategy in infringing case; is it aiming to stop infringer’s actions straight away or is the goal to extract the money in return for allowing it to continue? Could organization and infringer afford legal action? How strong is company’s IP protection and will it hold in the court if challenged or will it be invalided? These and other factors will determine what action will be taken when infringement happens. 

Legal proceedings are usually time consuming and expensive. However, when the case is going to the court, the rights holder can apply for the injunction that will stop the alleged infringement for the time of the lawsuit. Injunction alone could be enough to stop the infringement and reach the settlement. If winning the patent litigation lawsuit, the patent holder could be awarded with monetary damages and/or permanent injunction. These are damages to compensate for example any lost that has been caused by the infringement, and an injunction which will prevent further infringement. The amount of damages could be obtained depends on the intent of the infringer. If infringement was not deliberate, the penalty is very lenient, which could mean reasonable royalties that infringer would have paid in the first place of the amount of the lost caused to the patent holder by infringement.  If infringement was intentional, deliberate copying or action in bad faith, the courts can issue the patent holder with triple damages. 




3 PATENT ENFORCEMENT FROM ECONOMIC POINT OF VIEW 

3.1 IPRs are legal barriers to imitation
The enforcement and the thread of enforcement of intellectual property rights are crucial to the businesses engaged in innovative activities. In knowledge based economy, companies’ intellectual property rights are regarded as the most powerful competitive advantage and even as the last legal monopoly.  But why is that? To be able to answer on this question, we have to start from the beginning and explore what is meant by competitive advantage.
 
Alfred Chandler defines competitive strategy as:
“… the determination of long-term goals and objective of an enterprise, and the adoption of courses of action and the allocation of resources necessary for carrying out these goals.”
In other words, strategy is a set of existing competencies and resources employed in order to accomplish the long-term goals. These goals aim to establish competitive advantages that are sustainable in the long-term and create profits that can be collected by the company. Porter has divided such competitive advantages into two main types: lower costs than competitors and differentiation of products and services which could be sold with premium prices. In addition to these, a certain strategy must be sustainable vis-á-vis rivals, which according to Porter is achieved when barriers of imitation exist: 
“The sustainability of a generic strategy requires that a firm possesses some barriers that make imitation of the strategy difficult.” 

Casual ambiguity is very important in ability to create imitation barrier by making it difficult for competitors to copy a certain strategy. This ambiguity can be generated by tacitness, complexity and specifity. Beside these three characteristics of competencies or resources, there is another one that has been often forgotten when speaking about sustainable strategy – legal barriers. In the context of intellectual property, these are patents, trademarks, copyrights, etc. which constitute very important barriers to imitation. Even though it is obvious that substantial profits flow to IP-based businesses, managers are having difficulties to see how these legal rights could lead to profits. But sales volume, the selling price, and the cost of production are the main three components to determine company’s profits – and IP is the heart of all of them.  

IPRs, as legal barriers to imitation, are more sustainable than lower costs and differentiation. They are also enforceable and that way more profitable. IP rights holder is able to enforce its rights by taking legal action against the infringer. This is very effective and in some cases even necessary to stop infringement, but these legal proceedings involve a lot of time and resources.  When organization becomes aware of its rights being infringed, it is vital to take action fast. It is very attempting for companies to wait and hope infringement will stop without any action or wait for ‘pig to grow’. If rights holder will not act in certain timeframe just to collect higher damages, this delay can affect negatively on enforcement ability. In the worst case scenario it could result in invoking legal defenses of ‘laches’ and ‘estoppel’ by infringer though these are quite rare. In these cases the important thing is that company is having the reputation for enforcing its rights because if one competitor is seen to “get away” with infringement, then others will soon assume that it does not want to or will not enforce its rights.

There is different ways to use these legal barriers for imitation. Patents could be used in a defensive way, block the competitors from blocking oneself and thus ensuring “design freedom”, or offensive way, block competitors from using certain technology and thus ensuring “market freedom”. Traditionally the motive for patenting has been to protect core inventions of a business and not spend money on the minor, non-core inventions. However, nowadays it has been shifting from defensive purposes to more offensive and aggressive actions, where patents are used as an economic asset, a competitive weapon and in various bargaining situations. The following citation from US company in the 1930s is very accurate description of the situation in these days:
	In taking out patents we have three main purposes –(a) to cover actual machines which we are putting out, to prevent duplication of them… (b) to block the development of machines which might be constructed by others for the same purposes as our machines, using alternative means… (c) to secure patents on possible improvements of competing machines, so as to ‘fence in’ those and prevent their reaching an improved stage. 

In next sub chapters, I will examine types of companies and their use of the enforcement ability of patents in a strategic and profit generating ways. 

3.3 Company types
IP is more valuable when it is the only business that company has. This is illustrated by Blaxill and Eckardt in the IP/product matrix. In the Pic.1 there is a four-box matrix demonstrating some of negotiation power of different types of companies when it comes to their IP. Vertical axis is market share or sales power and horizontal axis represents strength of IP in a company. 
[Figure]
In the original matrix there is a new breed of companies, sharks, which is placed in the lower right corner. I also added there IP pure plays and Patent Trolls because they have somewhat the same position in the negotiation table. These are all non practicing entities. Companies in this corner have enormous bargaining power. The target, in the upper left corner, represents companies that have plenty of manufacturing and product activities, but they lack of IP strength. Because of a weak position in negotiation table, these companies are highly vulnerable and usually easy prey for sharks. These are two extreme types of companies. Usually most large companies try to balance these two characteristics by having large patent positions while generating large market share. This type of companies is holding a glass house position in the matrix. They are using their IP merely as supporting asset for their main activities. The newer smaller-market businesses, that may have small product sales and new-technology portfolio, the minnows, are positioned in the lower left corner. These companies have more options to develop towards other three breeds of companies.

3.3.1 Patent strategies of “The Glass House” companies 
So called glass house companies are usually big manufacturing entities that have large patent portfolios to support their businesses. Because these companies are manufacturing their own products, they are using their IP as a legal barrier to imitation which demands a certain kind of strategies. In the Pic. 2 is illustrated a number of generic patent strategies that company could apply in technology space. A patent is illustrated by a circle which size is indicating its scope. In reality configurations of these patents are not as neat as seen in the picture, which is only illustrating the principle of different scenarios. Also strategies are not usually relying solely on configuration models but also on the qualities of individual patents and their claims as well as on the situation and strategy of the company. With these in mind, generic patent strategies, according to Granstrand (1999), could be pictures as following:
[Figure]

In the first box there is ad hoc blocking and ‘inventing around’. In this situation one or a few patents are used to protect an innovation in a certain applications. They are easy and cheap to invent around. In strategic patent searching, there is a single patent that has a large blocking power. This patent is called a strategic patent (SP). It has enormous invent around costs and thus necessary in certain product areas. Blanketing means that the area has been turned into a minefield or a jungle of patents which is ‘mining’, more or less systematically, every step of a manufacturing process with patents. Flooding is quite the same but it is not as systematic as blanketing.  Blanketing and flooding strategies could be used in emerging technologies where is high uncertainty with directions of R&D or the economic importance of the scope of a patent. In a fencing situation, there is a series of patents organized in some way to block certain directions or lines of R&D. This method is used for a different solutions that all achieve a similar functional result. Surrounding is used as a strategy where an important patent, usually strategic patent, is fenced in or surrounded by other less important patents which collectively are quite effectively blocking the commercial use of the central patent. This tactic could be used for example when a competitor gets a strategic patent after which there is a race of patent applications that are trying to block the exploitation of the strategic patent. This situation creates a possibility for cross-licensing. Combination of patent networks is usually referred to a building a patent portfolio. These various kinds of patents and configurations are used to gain an overall protection and a strong bargaining power. 

These type companies could be divided in two categories: technology-blockers and trivial technology-blockers. The main goal of technology-blockers is to block competitors and protect its market share. This type of companies does not necessarily use already protected technology, but in some cases where the technology has become standardized, the company has to license its patent to others. Usually these companies are medium-sized or big companies that operate in niche markets like Nokia, Siemens or IBM.  Trivial technology-blocker companies own IPR protected technology which is already a part of the state of the art. These trivial patents could cover a wide range of supportive technologies which when enforced could block whole industries and thus force others to pay royalty fees. By enforcing their rights they mostly aim to gain a market share or protect the markets they operating.


3.3.2 IP Pure Plays aka Patent Sharks 
Patent sharks or IP pure plays are NPEs. A shark company is focused on a single purpose – innovation. Like sharks, IP pure plays are always on the move and continuously innovating. They do not produce and/or sell any products; their business is innovation and IP, which they licensing out. The company is highly fit and mostly invests in commercial innovation though sometimes they are starting from more research-focused point like universities which are known as scholastic sharks. Sharks are not dependant on other company’s IP rights or technology which gives them a very strong bargain position in a negotiation table. Actually, they are the ones who set a price and if other company is not willing to pay, negotiation is over. 

These companies (patent enforcers) chose not to manufacture their innovations but to exploit it in a different way. By economically enforcing their IPRs they compensate for investments they inputted in innovation. They usually license, sell or enforce their IPRs to create value. An example of a shark company is Qualcomm.  It made a strategic decision to stop support its weak product position and start to focus on its strong IP instead. They license their IP to all manufacturers, who, besides owning their own IP, make products. Qualcomm does not need anything from these companies, which put it in an advantageous bargain position. 

You could also count in trivial patent-enforcers to the shark category. Usually these are small companies or individuals that innovate and whose inventions have no new technological step however they are not in a current state of the art. The aim of these entities is to collect royalties using the thread of injunction. Even though the patents are not legally valid, the patent quality is usually not known to the license payer or he simply cannot afford the litigation fees, thus judicial processes are avoided. An example of this type of company is NTP, which was a one man company that sued RIM for patent infringement.

3.3.3 Patent Trolls 
The term “patent troll” is a negative synonym used for NPEs. These do not manufacture any products or services and do not promote innovation. They are highly reliant on speculation and opportunity rather than on building an organization that is capable to secure its returns. Their business model is purely based on buying up cheap patents from bankrupt technology companies and hide until the patent will become significant on the market after which they turn it against manufacturers to secure a higher royalty fees. Trolls usually appear when the product has become a key technology and secured its place in the company.  These companies are making hundreds of millions of dollars a year on licensing. How do they do that? The strategy of patent trolls is litigation. As mentioned earlier, patents give rights holders the right to forbid and sue others for making, using, offering for sale, selling, or importing for these purposes protected product without permission. Patent trolls are using this provision quite efficiently to create economic benefits. Even though there is only a slight possibility for patent troll to win patent infringement lawsuit, it is high enough to make substantial profit of their investment in patents even if they would win only occasionally. That said, not many companies will actually fight patent trolls in court because trolls have a powerful tool – the injunction. Thus companies often decide to settle with patent trolls rather than stopping their production for month or even years. According to Chien (2009), NPEs cause only a minority of patent suits which was 17 percent on the examined period. Nevertheless, damages awarded for patent trolls are twice as high as for practicing entities. Despite this, NPEs has only been successful in 29 percent of the cases where as practicing entities 41 percent. 

The characteristic of patent trolls to enforce their IPRs depends on the case. According to Opitz & Pohlmann (2010) there are two different types of licensees: the one that has already infringed the right and the one that has a possibility to choose to license. In the case of early license, license supplier gives a chance for manufacturing company to buy a license for its rights.  There are also a more invasive trolls that extort companies to pay royalties even when they have not infringed the patent. These types of trolls (license extortionists) are using extortive IPR enforcement which is seen for example in standards setting context.

Despite the fact that patent troll, after purchasing a patent, hides and wait for the technology to become standardized after which they appear to claim royalties, in many cases these patents are widely known and being used for a many years by the companies on the market. These types of trolls are called royalty claimants. Situation is different when the infringer does not even know that the patent he is infringing exists. These types of trolls (excessive royalty extortionists) are strategically hiding until the company has implemented certain technology or adopted a certain standard to be able to demand higher fees. They are also sometimes using public media and the fear of bad reputation of the infringer to extort enormous royalties. 

An example of a patent troll is TechSearch. Its entire business was based on a single patent. These companies are like scavengers which dig the landscape for cheap, valueless patents that provide solutions to some critical problems. They are not seeking for their prey like shark; they just sit under the bridge and wait for unfortunate company to step into their trap.

4 CONCLUSIONS 

While patent system was created to generate incentives to innovation it also brought vicious competition tool which took its breath in knowledge based economy - enforcement. Companies are using this strategic tool in different ways according to their business models, but they all use IP as a competitive advantage or at least as a revenue generator. If there would be no possibility to enforce, there will be no point in having patent system at all. Without a possibility to generate outstanding profits, companies do not have any incentives to invest in innovation. 

IPRs bring the greatest value to the company when it is used as a tradable asset which could nowadays be regarded as a corporate currency. This aspect of IPRs is causing some amount of controversy. It is thought that companies, which are making profits without producing tangible products, are making “money for nothing”. One could wonder what if the most powerful product manufacturers do not win the race to provide a technological solution. It is arguable that certain usage of enforcement ability is harmful for the modern economy because it may force some businesses out of the market or slow down actual technological development. On the other hand, there are NPE companies that promote innovation and competition, and creating a new market for technological information trading. Because of this, economics of IP is not all black and white; it’s a whole spectrum of colors depending from the standing point of view. NPE businesses are bringing new sparks among old fashion manufacturing companies. It is like spices in a soup, you spice it up when there is no flavor. 

Compared to manufacturing companies which are dependent on other market participants, patent troll and IP pure play businesses are (after all the negativity they have received) a brilliant and efficient way to enforce IPR to generate revenues. There is nothing personal, it is just business!


