Importance of industry cluster German Automotive Locations ­ Innovation and Production


1   Introduction
Germany is the largest country of automobile production in Europe, and ranks third in
the world after the United States and Japan (Pfaffman & Stephan, 2001). One of the
leading German automotive clusters is in the region around Stuttgart. Besides Daimler
and Porsche, approximately four hundred suppliers are located in this region. The
Stuttgart region is a leader in technological innovation (Reiner R. , 2006).

Increased global trade has forced many auto-giants such as General Motors,
Volkswagen and Daimler Chrysler to shift their production bases to developing
countries in order to gain operational efficiency, in an increasingly competitive global
marketplace (Biswajit, Banerjee, & Chatterjee, 2007). The BRIC-countries (Brazil,
Russia, India and China) have played an important role as areas for relocation. With
growing domestic car markets these countries are also vital for strategic repositioning
(BBC).

Previous research conducted by e.g. Biswajit et al has concentrated on the benefits of
relocating business functions to low-cost countries, such as cost-savings and strategic
positioning, to name but a few. The implications of partially relocating business
activities results in less synergies between different departments. Consequently, there is
a need for careful analysis of the potential benefits of relocation compared with the
gains attained from smaller, concentrated and interconnected business units, namely
clusters.
                                                              


1.1 Problem Definition
Growth management theory suggests that extensive benefits are received from
concentrated business units. My objective is therefore to analyze the benefits received
from clusters, where manufacturing and research facilities are located physically close.
Specifically concentrating on gains for production and innovation. The theoretical
foundations will be applied to the German automotive cluster in the surrounding region
of Stuttgart.

Dyer (1996) explored the effect of clustering on quality and innovation by comparing
the US automobile industry with its Japanese competitors. He measured the quality of
clustering by the degree of inter-firm specialization (i.e., automaker-supplier
relationship) and assessed the correlation of inter-firm specialization and performance.
His findings indicate that a high human asset specialization can be associated with a
high level of quality and faster product development cycles (Dyer, 1996, pp. 279-289),
whereby human asset specialization refers to the number of face-to-face contacts
between supplier and automaker, the number of guest engineers, and the degree of
information sharing (pp. 277-278).

In contrast to Dyers study this paper focuses on the benefits for production in addition
to innovation. It seems as if production fosters innovation, and vice-versa, so analyzing
the benefits with respect to both aspects displays the effects more truthfully.
Furthermore the investigation will be applied to just one cluster.

1.2 Course of the Investigation
The analysis will be divided into a theoretical and a case study part. To begin, the
conceptual framework of the analysis is presented. Porter's diamond model is referred
to as a theory to describe the competitiveness of national economies. Subsequently,
models and research on the competitiveness of smaller economic units, namely industry
clusters, are presented. Furthermore, the nature and the benefits of clustering will be
assessed. In particular, the benefits for production and innovation are examined.

The case study will apply the theoretical concepts to the German automotive industry. It
is hypothesized that the theoretical effects of industry clusters should also apply to the
firms within the Stuttgart region if evidence of clustering can be found. Subsequently,
the benefits of clustering for production and innovation are presented in more detail.
Finally, conclusions of the findings are summarized with respect to the objective.
                                                                 



2   Theoretical and Conceptual Background

2.1 The Competitive Advantage of Nations

A common aspect among the prosperity of the world's most advanced nations is that
they are all in possession of a competitive advantage. This advantage is created through,
and rests upon improving the usefulness and productivity of inputs. A nation can gain
competitive advantages by creating strategic assets (Amit & Schoemaker, 1993).

Companies, and therewith nations, create and sustain competitive advantages by
exposing themselves to pressure and challenge. The most valuable factors require heavy
investments and specialization, in order to best serve the particular needs of a country's
industry (Porter, 1990).

The national environment helps companies gain competitive advantages by: supporting
and allowing fast accumulation of specialized assets and skills; affording better and
ongoing information and insights into product and process needs; and finally by
creating an environment that pressures companies to innovate and invest. This leaves
companies no other choice than to gain and upgrade competitive advantages (Porter,
1990).

[Figure]

Porter describes the primary nature in which
competitive advantages emerge with his theory of the
diamond, which consists of four attributes: factor                          
conditions; demand conditions; related and supporting                         
industries; firm strategy, structure and rivalry (Porter,
1990, p. 77)(Porter M. E., 1990, p. 77). High quality           
factors contribute to it with supporting elements such
as skilled workers, infrastructure and capital resources.
The context for a firm's strategy and rivalry consist of                    
the local structure and rules, which encourages                              
investment and sustained upgrading. The proximity
of sophisticated and demanding customers enhances dynamic competition and can help
to anticipate global trends. Related and supporting industries, offer firms access to
capable, locally based suppliers as well as firms in related fields. The relationship to the
supporting industries is a reinforcing process and most advantageous when the
surrounding industries themselves are globally competitive (Porter, 1990).

2.2    The Nature of Industry Clusters

Industry clusters can be seen as regional agglomerations of interconnected institutions
that have unusual success in particular fields (Porter, 1998, p. 78). The geographic
scope of clusters can range from a single city to crossing natural borders. Furthermore, a
cluster can comprehend several types of economic agents, that is, it is not limited to the
profit-making firm. It is further noted that a cluster can extend downstream to channels
and customers, and laterally to manufacturers of complementary products and to
companies in industries related to skills, technologies, or common inputs (Porter, 1998,
p. 78). It should be noted that externalities are part of the definition of clusters and that
the character of those is usually assumed to be positive (c.f., Porter, 2003, p. 562).

The development of clusters is a long and progressive learning process. Studies
regarding clusters do not have a clear consensus about what the origins are. The roots of
a cluster can often be traced back to historical circumstances, but they also arise from
unusual, sophisticated or stringent local demands. Some authors address the importance
of materials, climate, university research and typical location factors (Scott, 2000).
Other theoretical approaches explain clusters by the initial presence of two important
firms, which lead to the emergence of an industry (e.g. Silicon Valley) or by public
sector investment activities (e.g. Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard
University for biotechnology sector in the Boston area) (Porter M. , 1998).

Innovation and location are the main drivers in the creation process. A massive wave of
outsourcing production and service has taken place and tends to happen in big networks
of suppliers and distributors. Clusters affect the competitiveness of nations within and
across countries in three distinguished ways: they lead to increased productivity of
companies based in the cluster; they drive the direction and pace of innovation; and
stimulate the formation of new businesses which expands and strengthens the cluster in
itself (Porter, 1998, p. 80). They both promote competition and cooperation. In his
famous book "The Competitive Advantages of Nations" (1990), Porter promotes
industry clusters rather than just one competitive industry.

Looking at single products from the "cluster lens" suggests that they need their own
home base, that should be located in the respectively most vibrant area, and it is most
beneficial to move linked activities to concentrated geographic areas. Companies should
foster personal relationships within the cluster, and make investments to engage
themselves locally. By getting involved in upgrading the cluster and working
collectively, growth can be promoted and can offer at the same time a way to link the
public and private sectors (Porter, 1998).

2.3 Benefit of Clusters for Production

Due to the evolvement of clusters in a reinforcing and supporting environment, they are
associated with increased productivity. They give rise to external economies of scale
(Marshall, 1920) by facilitating the access to various types of inputs; accessing
information, technology and needed institutions; coordination with related companies;
and measuring motivation and improvement (Porter, 1998, p. 81). A cluster allows a
member company to benefit as if it had greater scale or as if it had joined with others
without having to give up its flexibility (Porter, 1998, p. 81).

General access to capital assets is facilitated (Cuervo-García et al., 2009) and the
bargaining power of firms is enhanced, which leads to lower purchasing costs (Porter,
2003; Prevenzer, 1997). In the case of a densely geographically concentrated supplier
network, business customers may enjoy cost benefits through local sourcing (Porter,
2003). This lowers the transaction costs, and the creation of close and informal
relationships are a superior arrangement for all parties (Porter, 1998). Clusters allow
access to a specialized and skilled workforce, which is described by various researchers
(Almazan et al. 2006; Costa & Kahn, 2001; Diamond & Simon, 1990). Companies get a
chance to tap into already existing pools of experienced employees.

Within a cluster companies get the chance to tie relationships and get access to
specialized   information.    More    intense    cooperation       and   competition   appear
simultaneously, and are perceived to benefit productivity (Cuervo-García et al., 2009;
Porter, 2003). Both phenomena can coexist because they occur on different dimensions
and among different players (Porter, 1998). Khan and Ghani (2004) emphasize the
emergence of trust in clusters as a concept related to social capital. Adler and Kwon
(2002) summarize various studies indicating that social capital facilitates resource
exchange, supplier relationships, and regional production networks. Rousseau et al.
(1998) show the relation between trust and decreased transaction costs as well as
increased effectiveness in responding to crises.

The provision of public and quasi-public goods is enhanced by government but also by
the aggregation of firms and other institutions, so that mutual benefits arise while costs
are shared between members of the cluster (Porter, 2003). Public goods in clusters often
comprise infrastructure and administration, training programs and laboratories (Cuervo-
García et al., 2009).

The linkages within clusters result in synergies, and the joint forces as a whole become
bigger than the sum of its parts. Companies are mutually dependent, good performance
by one individual boosts the success of others. Since the products complement each
other, members of a cluster manage to better meet of customer needs. Members profit
from the other entities' reputation and the joint marketing mechanisms. Lastly,
complementarities result in making buying more attractive for customers (Porter, 1998).

Since cluster members are exposed to higher competition, the local rivalry puts more
pressure on the various members and is highly motivating. Pride and the desire to look
good in a community spur executives to attempt to outdo one another (Porter, 1998).

2.4 Benefit of Clusters for Innovation

Clusters play a vital role in a company's ongoing ability to innovate. Many of the above
stated factors that improve productivity have an even more dramatic effect on
innovation. The opportunities for innovation are more visible, and the environment
provides the capacity and flexibility to act rapidly. Companies manage to implement
innovations more quickly, and since local suppliers and partners are involved in the
innovation process, the outcome is ensured to better match customers' requirements
(Porter, 1998).

It has been found and investigated by various researchers that investment in research
and development (R&D) of private firms and universities spills over for third-party
economic agents (Jaffe, 1989; Acs et al., 1992, 1994; Feldmann, 1994a, b). At the same
time, it has been argued that knowledge spillovers are limited to certain geographic
boundaries (Marshall, 1920; Krugman, 1991b). The fact that the extent of knowledge
spillovers depends on distance is referred to as "specially-mediated knowledge
spillovers" (Audretsch & Feldmann, 1996, p. 630).

Porter (2003) argues that customers near clusters are more informed and demanding,
thus challenging firms more heavily. Due to the more sophisticated buyers, firms within
a cluster have a better view of the market compared to isolated competitors.

The ongoing relationships between entities help companies to learn early about new
technology, service and marketing concepts, to give a few examples. Companies get the
chance to experiment at a lower cost and can delay large commitments until they are
assured that a given innovation will pan out. Reinforcing all other advantages for
innovation is the sheer pressure that occurs within a cluster. Accordingly, clusters can
remain centers of innovation for decades (Porter, 1998, pp. 83-84).


3     Case Study - Analysis of the Stuttgart Cluster

3.1     Description of the Cluster

Some of the most well known German automotive clusters are located in Ingolstadt,
Munich, and Stuttgart. The GDP of Stuttgart is approximately to 95 billion euro,
corresponding to that of Hungary or the Czech Republic. Furthermore, the region is the
second largest contributor to German exports, following Munich (Verband Region
Stuttgart, 2010).

Other car manufacturing clusters such as Nagoya in Japan consists of only one main car
manufacturer and its suppliers. Stuttgart differs with two premium car manufacturers,
and hosts the headquarters of suppliers for more than four hundred small- and medium-
sized suppliers. The small- and medium-sized businesses encompass car manufacturing
per se but also other manufacturing industries, equipment suppliers, service companies,
auto-shops and trade.

The Robert Bosch GmbH, which is headquartered in Stuttgart, has the highest number
of patent applications in Germany; in 2007 the patent applications by the company
amounted to 2,509. Partially indicating the importance of Stuttgart for innovation (Welt
Online, 2008).


3.1.1   Daimler AG and Porsche AG
Daimler was founded in 1926 and is located in 23 places in Germany; six of these are
within the Stuttgart region. In Sindelfingen, the world's largest Daimler manufacturing
site employs (2,901,520 km²) 28,809 workers. The Daimler group's headquarters' and
the engine manufacturing are also located here (Daimler AG).

Porsche is a part of the Porsche Automobil Holding SE, which also manages the
Volkswagen affiliation. Porsche was founded in 1931, and currently employs around
800 workers. The company's four production locations are all in Germany, of which
three around Stuttgart (Dr. Ing. h.c. F. Porsche AG, 2010).


3.1.2   Suppliers

Suppliers can be classified into three tiers. Tier one suppliers are the main suppliers for
the original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) and directly provide whole systems and
modules. Tier two suppliers are responsible for the delivery of components, while tier
three suppliers only deliver individual parts. Each sub supplier, tier two and three,
provide the next higher level with their parts where they get assembled into bigger parts
of the cars. This paper concentrates in its descriptions on tier one and two suppliers.

Supplier parks have emerged around the main manufacturing sites of Daimler and
Porsche. These parks facilitate potential cooperation and coordination, promote
innovation and growth, and attract new firms building smaller clusters within a bigger
cluster. Table 1, in the appendix, lists a few main suppliers. Figure 3 illustrates the
regional proximity of suppliers and OEMs.

[Figure]

3.2 Impact on the region

The automobile industry is the main employer for citizens in the region of Stuttgart.
Thus many in the region are dependent on the health and economic condition of this
industry. Clear indicators for clusters are: close relations between OEMs and suppliers,
and their dependence on each other. In the Stuttgart cluster, close coordination and
regional proximity imply not only a greater dependency of suppliers, but also of the
OEMs, leading to a high dependency of the population, on the working opportunities
created by the industry. Organizations, such as the Cluster Initiative Region Stuttgart
(CARS), have been established to promote the automotive business, enhance the cluster
and innovation.

Education and qualified workers are widely available, reaching from line workers to
academic researchers, both provided by special schools and university co-operations.
The cluster surrounding Stuttgart has had the opportunity to grow slowly and expand at
a reasonable rate, starting in the year of 1926 when Daimler was founded (Daimler AG).
Material resources have not as much contributed to the growth of the cluster as
innovation and research.

The description of the Stuttgart region displays that many of the features of clusters are
in fact found in this region. In particular it holds that the Stuttgart region is
characterized by a geographical agglomeration of interconnected institutions that have
unusual success in a particular field, namely the automobile industry. This is just the
definition of Porter (1998), which is used for this paper's analysis (p. 78). It is therefore
assumed that the benefits that apply for clusters in general also apply for the cluster
around Stuttgart. In the following, the benefits for the sectors of production and
innovation are examined in more detail.

3.3 Analysis of Benefits for Innovation

As stated above, material resources have not contributed to the growth of the cluster as
much as innovation and research. Research and innovation by the main players show a
clear profession towards the Stuttgart region. Daimler for example is currently changing
its R&D structure away from free studies toward a centered approach in close relation
with products and production. This new center is located in Sindelfingen, which is now
the main research location for Daimler (Haake, 2009).

Cooperation with universities allows companies to harvest knowledge spillovers and
facilitates the recruiting of highly qualified employees. One example for this
development in Stuttgart is the "exhaust researching" center in Weissach, founded by
Audi, BMW, Daimler, Porsche, and Volkswagen. Highly complex research projects are
more likely to get outsourced to specialized service contractors or classical suppliers.

In the region of Stuttgart 15 main research contractors can be identified; ten with more
than 200 employees and internationalized operations. Examples include Bertrandt AG
in Ehningen with around 8000 employees worldwide and the MBtech Group in
Sindelfingen with approximately 2600 employees.


3.4 Analysis of Benefits for Production
As described in the theoretical part, employees are crucial agents for the presence of a
successful cluster. Obtaining skilled and experienced workers is made relatively easy by
the local government of Stuttgart. Workers can be recruited from different sources, such
as specialized schools and universities

Local outsourcing is deemed as more efficient and effective compared to distant
outsourcing. In the region numerous specialized suppliers make this possible. The
proximity of locations is time and cost-saving; in addition shorter and more developed
routes reduce transportation costs. Some roads have been specifically adapted to suit the
needs of frequent heavy haulage. Railroad systems leading into the manufacturing sites
and direct connection to the German railways facilitate the transportation as well. To
illustrate the closeness of locations, one can take the distance from the Bosch
Headquarters in Gerlingen to the Porsche headquarters in Zuffenhausen, which is 10
km. This makes just-in-time delivery possible and the highly developed railways
enhance it.

Many locally headquartered firms, e.g. Eisenmann who provides varnishing and other
facilities, as well as resources and suppliers are readily available. Companies are
mutually dependent, due to interconnectedness, supply and demand of labor.
Complementing products in clusters benefit production since they do increase the
possibilities available to the customers. For instance, Mercedes manufacturing in
Stuttgart is complemented by AMG, which enhances the standard cars (Daimler AG).

Local rivalry between Daimler and Porsche benefits the development of more efficient
luxury vehicles such as the new electronic engines for Porsche or hybrid Mercedes S
400. It drives both companies to innovate more rapidly and produce products that better
meet customer needs. The local infrastructure corresponds to the needs of the
companies and employees. For example the city of Sindelfingen re-planned roads so
Daimler can build a new R&D center, bus timetables and traffic lights are adjusted to
when manufacturing shifts begin and end.


4   Conclusion

This Seminar Paper has shown that clustering benefits cities, regions, and the overall
economy and ultimately fosters growth. Clusters benefit production by saving costs and
time, by making available resources in proximity and by providing an adequate
infrastructure. It fosters innovation by creating knowledge-spillovers, enabling access to
financial capital for investments, and enhancing the creation of start-ups. Furthermore,
demanding customers of the cluster can help to enhance certain trends.

In order to answer the question about the role of the German automotive cluster with
respect to innovation and production, the most likely scenario is that production fosters
innovation and vice-versa. When evidence of clusters can be found, it indicates higher
productivity, but the exact impact of production is difficult to measure. However, the
location advantage of production is not solely determined by productivity. The highly
specialized parts, in which extensive knowledge is required, are likely to be sustained
and kept in Germany.

It can be said that in the future, innovation will continue to play a major role in the
German automotive industry cluster and that this trend is more evident than the future
of the production location. It is very likely that especially the production of the more
expensive models will be kept in Germany in order sustain a high-profile image of
certain OEMs. It can be concluded that scientific research strongly indicates several
benefits of clustering for productivity.

The only main disadvantages of the Stuttgart cluster and the German automotive
location as a whole are high costs for labor, manufacturing and taxes. The main
advantages are the availability of high quality specialized workers and the presence of
research competence, innovation and technological advance. Furthermore, the
availability of specialized production inputs and equipment, high-skilled suppliers with
close cooperation represents a main advantage. Another advantage is the presence of
infrastructure, political and social stability, institutional certainty and property rights.

Whether production will remain in Germany primarily depends on the ability to
compensate high wages with high productivity. Recent developments have been
beneficial in that respect: From 2000 to 2008, productivity gains in the German
automobile industry have outpaced real wage rises (Economist, 2010, p. 6). If (BBC,
2010) this development continues in the future, Germany as a location for production
and innovation will be able to compete against advantages of low-cost countries.
                                                           
