Pricing Strategies

Introduction
In recent 30 years, a lot of papers have been written about the process of setting prices. These papers for example propose a six-step approach (Oxenfeldt 1975:238-239) or a nine-step approach for new product pricing (Kent 1990:284). First, firms should identify their marketing and pricing objectives (1) and then identify the key parties to their pricing process (2). Second, they should identify alternative pricing sub strategies (3) and identify the effects of price changes on the different parties with present and future impacts (4). Finally, they should predict the consequences of price moves and the other associated changes (5) and evaluate each single to determine its usefulness (6). Similarly, Kent proposes to estimate the demand at different prices over the product-life-cycle (1) the costs (2) and the price-profit-volume-relationship (3). Second, the firm should identify its competitors (4), their entry capabilities (5) and estimate their likely entry dates (6). Finally, they should determine a marketing strategy (7), estimate marketing requirements and consequently choice a certain price.
Despite the importance of processes to select prices, fewer researchers have studied single pricing strategies as such, compared these and pointed out their advantages and disadvantages. The question about, which strategy should be used is easier to answer if price strategies are known better. 
This study focuses on the strategies of pricing, what they suggest, how they should be applied and, how they differ.

Definition of price
Before starting to study pricing strategies it seems to be necessary to define “price” as such. Nessimand Dodge (1995) make thus a distinction between “marketplace view” and “cost view” (7). He defines the first one as “… a monetary expression of the value for dimensions of quality or features/benefits for a given product or service as compared with other products or services.”. The relationship can be expressed as follows  “Price =“ and ads that value provides the basic function of the product,  and the second as “…ignores the marketplace and concerns itself solely with covering costs incurred in manufacturing and distributing the product, plus a return on investment.”
Differently, price is defined by Monroe (1990) as “… amount of money we must sacrifice to acquire something we desire.” and expresses this as an formal ratio 
[Formula]
In contrast, Kotler and Armstrong (2010) define price as “… price is the sum of all the values that customers give up in order to gain the benefits of having or using a product or service.” (314) 
This paper will use the definition of Kotler and Armstrong.
Skimming
Skimming strategy or also called skim-the-cream strategy is applied, when the product is first sold at a high initial price, which is later lowered. Several reasons can be mentioned why price skimming is reasonable. First, the firm might be interested in establishing a high-quality image for its product (Nessim and Dodge 1995:85). A study conducted by the Social Science Research Council in 1971 shows that a relation between price and demand amount exists. They asked 1000 housewives whether they would buy butter from a certain brand at a certain price or not. Several price levels were examined. At a price of 4 pence about 30 % of the consumer bought the butter. When prices are increased to 6 pence about 40 % wanted to buy the butter. At 8 pence about 50 %, at 9 pence about 80% of consumer wanted to buy it. After a further increase to 11 pence the percentage of willing consumer decreased to 40 % and after a further increase to 12 pence only about 10% of the total consumer wanted to buy the butter. The reason for the buying behaviour is the distrust of consumer inproducer to deal in products and services of an appropriate quality at low prices and the unwillingness to exceed a certain maximum amount when buying products and services. The effect of price as a quality indicator is the stronger the less familiar consumers are with certain products (Gabor 1977:199-207). Second, the firm may want to achieve a faster amortisation of R&D costs because of the higher initial margins. Therefore it is useful for innovative, unusual or highly improved products. Third, it is easier to cut prices than to increase those (Nessim and Dodge 1995:85). Price skimming is hence a form of market segmentation, i. e. the market is separated in more segments and for each segment a different strategy is applied. The high initial price may attract consumers, who do not care about high prices in general. Later the product more appeals to consumer with the preference to low prices (Dean 1969:174).
Penetration Pricing
The most important reasons for applying the so called penetration strategy, or also known as volume strategy are to achieve huge market shares in a short period and to deter competitors by being able to offer cheaper conditions. The price is set at a very low level and is not changed within the followed periods. Competitors would only be able to make small margins and will not enter the market (Gabor 1977:214). An advantage involved may occur through the effect of economies of scale. The fast gaining of market share reduces the per-unit costs as fixed costs decrease. However, this strategy involves also dangers. Because of the “price as quality indicator”-effect a low price could trigger fewer purchases than a higher price. Competitors could also try to deal in products at the same price level and nullify the relative advantage (Nessim and Dodge 1995:86).
Extremer forms of low pricing strategies besides penetration pricing are expansionistic pricing, i. e. products are sold at a very low price which might be lower than penetration prices, preemptive pricing in order to delay market entries of competitors and extinction pricing with the objective to destroy competitive firms by introducing products at an price as cheap as the costs or even with the objective to destroy competitive firms. All three strategies have come under scrutiny and are partially illegal (Nessimand Dodge 1995:86-88).
Premium Pricing
In contrast to penetration pricing and skimming the price by deciding for a premium pricing strategy is set at high initial levels and is not changed within the followed periods. Other names for premium pricing are prestige pricing or quality pricing. The motivation for buying high-priced products is the price itself. It bases again on the “price as quality indicator”-approach as mentioned above. Products with premium prices are naturally luxurious like perfumes, liquors, etc. (Nessim and Dodge 1995:85-86).
Furthermore, in literature exists another, narrower definition of premium pricing.According to Vithala and Kartono premium pricing refers to the setting of a higher price for one version of a product with more features than are available on other products of the firm. Therefore, it can just be used if the firm offers more similar products. If a firm just wants to signal a higher quality for its product the name price signalling should be used (VithalaandKartono 2009:31-33).
Further reasons why a strategy should be chosen could be derived from a study conducted by KostisIndounas and George Avlonitis (2011). They selected a random sample of 600 companies and collected data through a mail service. Consequently, 177 companies participated, whereby 49 were small, 68 medium, and 60 big sized companies) (Indounas and Avlonitis 2011:28).
All of them had to evaluate 20 criteria chosen from common pricing literature why to decide for premium, skimming, or pricing-similar-to-competitive-prices, which refers to setting a price at the level similar to competitors’ prices (Nessim and Dodge 1995:76-77), and give each criterion points from 1 (totally disagree) and 5 (totally agree) (Indounas and Avlonitis 2011:28).
As a result, the most important criteria for skimming were “Creation of a prestigious image” (4.15), ”Need to make the service well-known” (3.64),  “Coverage of the service’s development costs” (3.48), “Ability to reduce the cost as the production increase” (3.21). For penetration pricing companies decided on “Attraction of new customers” (4.25), “Need to make the service well-known” (4.05) , “Achievement of a satisfactory market share” (3.95), “Discouragement of new competitors entering into the market” (3.44). And, for pricing similar to competitive prices they decided on “Attraction of new customers” (4.03), “Achievement of a satisfactory market share” (3.82), “Ability to reduce the cost as the production increases” (3.32), and “Large number of competing services” (3.28) (Indounas and Avlonitis 2011:29).
Pricing within the Marketing Mix
Price is beside place, promotion and product one element of the Marketing-Mix (Kotler 2010:76). It is vital to make pricing decisions always under the consideration of other Marketing-Mix decisions. In this sense, synergistic effects may occur. The sum of all actions within a period is bigger than the sum of single actions without other actions in a period. An effect can be reached if the elements fit. To achieve the best result the applied strategy must be consistent, i. e. a low-quality product would be consistent with a low price, elements must be integrated, i. e. high advertising expenditures are financed by high prices and in turn high margins, and a leverage in the marketing mix is obtained, i. e. single elements are used to the advantage of the whole mix (Nessim and Dodge 1995:15-16).
Price as a powerful instrument
According to Baker, Marn and Zawada pricing improvements have the strongest impact on the operating profit in comparison to improvements in variable costs, fixed costs or, unit sales volume. They compared different measures on the basis of Global 1200 firms. A price improvement by 1 % leads to a 8.7 % increase in operating profits. Whereas a decrease by 1 % in variable costs leads to a 5.9 % increase in profits, a 1 % increase of the volume leads to a 2.8 % increase in profits and, a 1 % decrease in fixed costs leads only to a 1.8 % increase in profits. It may seem very advantageous to make use of price improvements. On the other hand, it is also very dangerous to change prices, because the firm could also result in huge declines if the wrong price is chosen (Baker, et al. 2010:4-6).
Requirements before making pricing decisions
Before choosing a price it is advised to know the productcosts (Nessim and Dodge 1995:39), estimate demand figures (Nessim and Dodge 1995:67) and forecast rivals reaction (Oxenfeldt 1975:96). The first one is necessary for two reasons. First, knowing costs should enable firms to predict margins and if they will be competitive. Second, knowing costs make firms more creative in finding ways to reduce them. For example Louisiana Oil and Fire switched from personal selling to telemarketing and increased selling volume by 100 %, while reducing selling expenses by 10 % (Nessim Dodge 1995:39-40).
Allocating costs could be difficult. The firm has to take into account different activities, material, labour, etc. and therefore many different approaches exist. Furthermore, costs are not constant, because material prices or prices for working hours may change over periods. It is therefore necessary to forecast costs similar to forecast the demand. The effects of economies of scale, i. e. bigger volume sizes decrease costs, because of investing in cost-saving technology, etc., economies of scope, i. e. machineries is used varied and different products are produced with the same machines, and the approach of the experience curve, i. e. firms can improve their skills over periods and decrease unit costs through better know-how, also influence costs (Nessim and Dodge 1995:41-47).
When costs are allocated and forecasted it is still difficult to make pricing decisions, because the demand is still unknown. The highest possible price may result in a very low demand and end in a loss. The lowest possible price may also end in a loss, because of too low margins. To estimate future demands sales representatives or experts could be asked, historical data can be used by applying a regression model, a buyer survey could be conducted.Apart from that, a test market could be implemented, i. e. the product is sold in certain geographic area for a limited time to test consumer behaviour, or laboratory experiments could be used, i. e. behaviours are tested in an artificial environment. The different approaches may differ in costs and reliability (Nessim and Dodge 1995:66-74).
To have success as price setter it may be advantageous to know rival firms and forecast their reactions. The first step, getting known of rivals, is quite difficult, as firms often operate in hundreds of geographic markets. They should collect data about brands considered by customer to buy, retail statements to salesmen, changes in customer preferences, other brands sold by its retailer, etc. (Oxenfeldt 1975:124-126).Competitive firms can set prices in comparison to a firms own prices in several ways. They could choose a similar or equal price, a higher price and charge it to a smaller number of customers, or a lower price (Oxenfeldt 1975:113). Forecasting methods may be to ask experts or sales-representatives, or to use historical data like at forecasting sales demand.
Apart from the factors mentioned the so called price elasticity plays a crucial role when making pricing decisions. As the focus of this paper is rather marketing, than economics the theory on the elasticity of prices will not be discussed in detail. The only important assumption here should be that consumer could react very sensitive on price changes, and that this implies high price elasticity or that they could react very insensitive on price changes, what implies low price elasticity (Monroe 1990:32). Choosing prices should not be done without take considerations about the price elasticity of a certain product. The effect of a change in price on sales volume is the higher the higher price elasticity is.
