Logistical solutions on negative environmental impact-theory vs. practice

1.	Introduction

Environmental awareness, as well as the importance of environmental sustainability, is increasing. This has led to developments and improvements in logistics, since companies' negative environmental impact usually comes from logistical conditions, e.g. transporting and warehousing. Effective logistical systems are a necessity for well-functioning societies and companies. It is also generally accepted that the rate at which we use our natural resources is not sustainable, other solutions must be found. 

With ever increasing transports of goods, logistics is considered one of the bigger environmental threats. At the same time, logistical systems give opportunities to improve the environmental impact (Storhagen 2003). Even though technology has improved, cars and trucks pollute less, the increased amounts of goods being transported has led to an overall increase of emissions (Aronsson et al. 2006).

Research on how to improve the negative impact on the environment through logistical structures is insufficient. There are not enough case studies on ways companies actually handle these environmental issues or create new possibilities. The world is changing, there are new demands with new threats on the environment, which means that new solutions for improvements are needed.  

While the bulk of modern transportation of wares is done using fossil fuel based vehicles, the question of carbon and other dangerous emissions will always be on top of the agenda. The purpose of this paper is to gather and compare theoretical and practical information on improving environmental impact through logistical solutions, to answer the question; how does theory and practice differ? The paper will be delimited to what logistical solutions are Itella Oyj using.

This paper is arranged in four different sections. The first section will be a short review of the negative impact transporting goods has on the environment. The second part will be a theoretical overview on different logistical solutions on minimizing the environmental impact of transportation and warehousing (Storhagen 2003) and (Aronsson et al. 2006). The third section will examine what logistical solutions Itella Oyj have used to minimize the negative impacts on the environment. The last part will be a discussion and a conclusion about the solutions made.

2.	Environmental impact

Logistics is the management of physical, informational, cash and reverse flow, within as well as between different stations and stakeholders, (e.g. managing the flow from raw-material to a finished product to delivery to the customer). The purpose of logistics is to maximize flow efficiencies (Storhagen, 2003 p. 32). Different areas of logistics are transportation, inventory, warehousing, material handling and packaging (Wikipedia, 2011). These all affect the environment, especially transportation of goods with its emissions.

Pollution can come in a lot of different forms and have a local, regional and global impact. Emissions of greenhouse gases, like e.g. carbon dioxide (CO2), and nitric oxide (NO) cause climate change, and pollution in the air, ground and water. Also waste, noise and bad smells are considered as pollution. Infrastructure also has environmental impacts due to the need for building roads, railways and the companies’ different premises (Storhagen, 2003 p.272-273). This in turn leads to destruction or loss of biodiversity and different kinds of ecosystems (Erlandsson et al. 2008).

In the year of 2009, the emissions of greenhouse gases were 66.3 million Carbon dioxide equivalents (CO2e, a measurement for the emissions of greenhouse gases) in Finland. This was a decrease of 5.8 per cent from the year before and could, according to Pipatti, be an effect from the economic recession during that time. It was also about 7 per cent below the Kyoto protocol goal. Energy consumption within the industry accounts for the largest decrease of emissions by 23 per cent. The decrease in emissions caused by transportation was 5 per cent, which partly can be explained by the recession and partly by using biofuels. Emissions caused by waste decreased by 4 percent while the emissions caused by the usage of electricity and heating had increased by 5 (Pipatti, 2011).

3.	Logistical solutions

The different literatures suggests quite similar logistical systems as solutions on minimizing environmental impact, but also mention that one needs to put it into a broader perspective, that different organizational levels have different impact. According to Aronsson et al. the relationship between operational effectiveness and environmental aspects is very important to understand, since the decisions made on different levels affect both. (Aronsson et al. 2006) 

There is no question that transportation of goods has a negative impact on the environment but according to Storhagen there are many things one can do to improve the situation. A simple thing is to consider more environmentally friendly options like using trains instead of trucks, or combining them when possible. Also choosing vehicles using biofuels instead of fossil-fuels is a way (Storhagen, 2003 p. 273-274). Using rail transportation also enables the company to transport a larger amount of goods. (Aronsson et al. 2006) 

Technical developments of the vehicles have made them better and the choice of vehicle can make quite a difference. Things like the vehicle's motor, weight and its air resistance can have an impact on how much fuel it consumes and how much emissions it emits. Another thing to think about is how much of the vehicle is recyclable and of course the way it is used. With capable drivers and route planning, a lot of fuel can be saved and damages can be kept to a minimum (Storhagen, 2003 p. 273-274).

Physical standardizations of transport vehicles and load carriers makes the whole delivery-process easier since they can be reused and no extra time has to be spent on finding the right vehicle for the right load carrier. Standardization of these would also mean that one can standardize the loading and handling equipment as well. This also leads to increased fill rates, which leads to fewer deliveries and a reduced environmental impact (Aronsson et al. 2006).

Increase fill rate or consolidation is good solution since that would decrease the number of vehicles driving only half-full. Aronsson et al. give different examples on how to increase the fill rate through changes to the logistics infrastructure, e.g. increasing the size of warehouses and at the same time reduce the number of them. Changing the location of a warehouse, to centralize the whole distribution to reduce the amounts of deliveries made to fewer but full (Aronsson et al. 2006).

Other ways of increasing fill rates are careful route planning and having longer lead times, so that transports will be made first when vehicles can be fully loaded. Consolidation, (carpooling for products), between companies with similar products and delivery routes will again reduce the amounts of deliveries made. Consolidation also saves companies money since they can split the cost and there is no need for driving every day. Repacking the goods so more of them fit in a vehicle also increases the fill rate (Aronsson et al. 2006).

It is also very important to use different IT technologies, since they help to collect information, e.g. updates on supply and demand, which leads to more efficient planning. Route planning and leads to less back and forth driving and that traffic-jams or other disturbances can better be avoided (Storhagen, 2003, p. 274). Product management and a larger control over the flows make it easier to plan earlier which products have to be delivered where, which leads to fewer transports. Using technology to follow the deliveries makes increases safety and also makes it easier to make changes mid delivery (Aronsson et al. 2006).

Different measures taken by the government can also help. Building better infrastructure (e.g. roads, tunnels, bridges, railways and ports) can for instance decrease traffic-jams, which has a negative impact on the environment because of more emissions. Regulations and fees are also a way for the government to control the amount of transportation. Laws to regulate which vehicles must be used in transporting different kinds of goods and fees to regulate the amount of traffic in e.g. cities (Storhagen, 2003 p. 274). In Finland, the Environmental Protection Act (Miljöskyddslag 4.2.2000/86) was stipulated to prevent the pollution of the environment and reduce the damage caused by pollution for a sustainable development (Finlex. 2011).

Revers logistics has become a more important part of the flow chain, since it brings the chain back to the beginning though recycling and reuse (Storhagen, 2003 p. 275).
The waste law (Afallslag 646/2011) was stipulated to prevent danger and harm to health and the environment due waste, through reducing the quantity of waste and promoting sustainable use of natural resources. The waste law also stipulates that the producers of products which cause waste have to make sure that the product and the way it is produced not harmful. Nor should the producers use excessive packaging, they should recycle and make sure to inform their customers ow how to recycle their product (Finlex, 2011). Transportation carriers which can be used again is an easy way to start (Storhagen, 2003 p. 277).

4.	Itella Oyj's solutions

Itella Oyj manages the flow of information and products. Itella consists of three business groups; Itella Mail Communications, Itella Information, and Itella Logistics. Itella Mail Communications maintains the daily postal services in Finland, which is their primary role. They also provide companies in Finland and Russia with marketing solutions to help them better reach their customers. Itella information helps companies develop their financial management processes. Itella Logistics operates in eight different countries and provides companies logistics services with different transportation vehicles as well as warehousing. Itella provides work for 29 000 people and their turnover in 2010 was 1842 million euro (Itella, 2011).

Itellas solutions to reducing are mainly focused on measures taken in Finland but partially also through climate projects abroad. These projects are made in countries which are not a part of the Kyoto Protocol, since these countries already are bound to reduce their emissions. One of the projects is to help building wind turbines in Turkey and another is to build an anaerobic treatment plant in Thailand for recycling biogas. The purpose of these climate projects is to reduce the same amount of emissions, in another part of the world, as Itella are emitting in Finland. These emissions amount to about 22 gram per letter (Itella, 2011).

Minimizing the negative impact of transporting all of the letters and packages Itella states is done by economical driving, by optimizing delivery routes and consolidation. They have also participated in the usage of new technical solutions. As the first company in Finland, they stated using natural gas vehicles already in 2006. Natural gas vehicles are a cleaner alternative, since they create almost no harmful micro particles, and the CO2 emissions are about 10 percent lower. Their goal is to lower their total CO2 emission by 30 percent by the year 2020 (Itella, 2011).

During 2008-2011 Itella has also bought electrical scooters, to try how well these can be used in Finland. These scooters were specially designed for delivering mail and emit only 30 percent of what a normal scooter using fossil fuels emits. Electrical scooters are also very quiet, which is a decrease in sound pollution, and nice for the workers as well as the surroundings. Itellas goal is that by the year 2012, 50 percent of all their scooters should be electrical ones (Itella, 2011).

When using subcontractors, Itella uses an environmental points-system, where the European emission standards are used for evaluating the vehicles. All of their subcontractors are expected to use vehicles which are of Euro 3 or Euro 4 standard. The European emission standards are used to set exhaust limits to vehicles sold in the European Union. There are different standards depending partially on the type of vehicle and technological advancements. Due to European Union directives, standards are increasingly stringent. Vehicles which do not meet the standards cannot be sold in the EU member states (Wikipedia. 2011). As a buyer of transporting services Itella favors companies which are members of, and follow the guidelines of, the energy efficiency agreement for the transportation industry (Itella, 2011).

When new transportation vehicles are bought, the maximum allowed CO2 emission is 180 g CO2/km. If the emissions do not exceed 120 g CO2/km, Itella is granted a compensation of 50 euro per month on the vehicles taxation-value. Currently more than one third of the vehicles bought in 2009 and 2010 meet these requirements (Itella, 2011).


Itella also wants to reduce the CO2 emissions in other parts of their business operations. The energy consumption in their premises is quite high, especially in the sorting centers. Since the beginning of 2011, 100 per cent of their electricity consumption in Finland is electricity which is produced from renewable energy sources, e.g. wind and water. Doing this Itella has managed to reduce their CO2 emissions with 15 percent (Itella, 2011).

Improvements on their reverse logistics at their premises have also been made. A new plan for how waste will be recycled has been stated, where there also are calculations of the amount of waste. The purpose of this plan has been to prevent the occurrence of waste as well as to reuse, and recycle materials. Also the option of providing customers with electronic mail and invoices reduces the usage of paper (Itella, 2011).

Educating the employees about recycling and sorting has together with this new plan, now led to an almost non existing production of mixed waste. Also the amount of waste being deposited at some places has decreased up to 70 percent. This has overall led to cleaner and safer working environment. Itellas logistics center in Vantaa, which is the largest sorting center, has even been approved for the ISO 14001 environmental certificate (Itella, 2011).

The stores have been renewed so that the premises correspond to today’s service demands. They have tried to recycle large amounts of the furniture after the renovations and this is now a part of their service image. Lighting will be changed entirely to LED-lamps since they do not use as much electricity or service upkeep. Yet they admit that they are still looking for better lighting solutions (Itella, 2011).

As a new logistical solution to getting the employees to work Itella had a month long campaign for bicycling during the nationwide cycling week. This campaign encouraged the employees to come to work by bicycle and over 400 people participated. Not only was it good for the environment, but also for their health. Together they bicycled over 50 000 km, which was a CO2 decrease of 9000 kg (Itella, 2011).

5.	Discussion  and conclusion

Itella has a lot of different solutions on minimizing their negative environmental impact, mostly technological improvements. Just like the solution presented in the theory, Itella has reduced their emissions from transport by economical driving, optimizing delivery routes and consolidation. They have also started using optional fuels like natural gas and electricity. Overall they have in some form incorporated all of the different logistical solutions mentioned in the theory – and more. 

When it comes to companies’ environment polices or corporate social responsibility (CSR) reports, the question of authenticity and suspicion often arise. According to a study made by Susanne Arvidsson on the “Views of Management Teams in Large Companies”, when making reports on CSR or environmental impact companies only strive for not being last on the list. This means that they just do not strive to do very much more than what is needed; this can make their procedures questionable. The information is also not always so transparent, so it is not so easy to check whether it is true (Arvidsson, 2010).

I do not know what the case of Itellas measures are, but I believe that what they claim to have done is true, since the negative impact of fraud and other indecencies on a company's reputation are quite severe. What is more difficult to say is wether effects of their measures have the positive impact they claim.

Accordign to Wu et al. it is not easy to include environmental management principles in the daily decision making (Wu et al. 1995). Itella seems to have overcome this obstacle and done a great deal to improve their environmental impact, solutions like their climate projects abroad and encouraging their employees to come to work by bicycle. These solutions are not really connected to their logistical operations but as earlier stated a broader perspective is needed as well as innovation like this. The question is; are they sustainable, which is difficult to say before trying.

Overall theories are more general, which leads to that a lot of companies have to make their own versions to fit their company. It also takes longer time to implement new theories and for old ones to change. Itella being a logistics company could be a reason for the amount of innovation and general knowledge on logistical solutions. There should be more case studies made on what companies are doing in practice and the effects of these actions.
