The introduction of self-management to an organization through management
1 Introduction

The topic self-management focuses often on how to work more efficient and perform better through that (Rytikangas, 2008). Today’s businesses emphasize much on high-performance, results, hard-working environment, and a business minded attitude. Therefore there have been many articles and studies describing how this influences workers and how they have enough strength to cope with the upbeat business life. The subject is concerned with questions on how to organize our tasks, to do better plans, to focus on our jobs, to delegate tasks, to be more efficient, how to be better at decision-making and how to take care of our own development so that we can manage our own job tasks.
There arefewer studies on how the leaders and managers in an organization could improve the know-how and skills of the entire organization by first learning and adapting the skills through self-management for themselves. In this paper,I will therefore focus on this part of self-management; how it can be tapped by organizations through their managers.
Gary Hamel (2011) mentions in one of his articles that “management is the least efficient activity in your organization”. He continues that this is because it is costly, there tend to be too much decision layers and it takes time to do different responses to decisions. However, Glenn Gutek (2011) and Stephen Long (2011) have both written articles on how a manager can be more efficient attheir job through self-management and how they can transfer this forward through to the organization. Long also continues that managers need to learn first to manage and lead themselves, before he can start to try to manage and lead others.In this paper, I will focus on this later part; how the organizations can be more efficient with the help of self-management through their managers.
This paper hope to show that self-management can be adapted to the entire organization with the help of the manager. If the manager first adapts the self-management teachings himself, he can show a good example to the other workers and help them to adapt the teachings through to the entire organization.
I have organized the rest of this paperinto four sections. The following section will introduce self-management and its field of study. It helps to understand what questions and topics the subject concerns. After this, we can dig further into our paper topic on how managers can help the entire organization adapt and learn these teachings by learning them first for themselves. Hamel (2011), Rytikangas (2008), Gutek (2011), Long (2011) and a few more will be used as sources to present the background and ideas for this paper. After this there will be some discussion about the findings and what have been learned. Finally, there will be a literature review before the conclusion.
2 Literature review

Self-management as a topic has interested me for a long time. The subject includes many interesting points and also contains many practices that could be used in today’s fast paced business life that stresses hard-work environment, high-performance, results, and a business minded attitude. Self-management itself contains topics like how to cope with stress, how to manage time more efficient, and how to be more effective during the working hours. Leadership is also a subject that has been covered broadly. By reading the material found out that there is written commonly about self-management and about leadership;however, these subjects haven’t been combined in many ways. This gave me the idea of what if; self-management could be taken better into consideration in organizations through leadership.Perhaps it couldalso be better adopted into practice this way. This is why I wanted to review literature on self-management and on how managers can help the organization learn by their actions.
3 Methods

Today’s businesses emphasize much on high-performance, result, hard-working environment,and a business minded attitude. Organizations are focused widely on business and want to see results. This is also the reason why we are looking for explanations if business is not flourishing or going the way planned.
In the 1910’s there were a form of scientific management called taylorism. Workers were only seen as performers and all planning and policy making was done by the top management. Henry Ford took this even further and introduced an assembly line working method. Here the work could be split up into small pieces to gain the maximum power. This way everyone just needed to focus on their own tasks and make it more effective. The workers were seen in a very mechanical and negative way. This form of working did not enhance the workers motivation and commitment for work. (Kehusmaa 2010: 137.) 
Later during the 20th century relationship management gained ground and managers started building relationships with their employees. Managers also started to spend time with the employees and give the employees a picture that they had the possibility to take part in the decision making. This way of management committed workers better to their employers. (Kehusmaa 2010: 140-143.) 
The role of management and their efficiency is seen in various ways still today. Poor management skills are the reason for keeping back growth (Poor management skills 1996). Management is ineffective, costly and makes the organization slower because of approval layers (Hamel 2011). Today still many people, both managers and employees, think that all the strategic decisions are only made by the management team and that the rest of the employees are left outside strategic planning (Kehusmaa 2010: 138).
In today’s organizations the character of our jobs has changed in a fast pace and in considerable ways compared with the amount of training we are getting for our jobs and also the ability to handle all the work tasks (Allen 2003). These factors result in that workers feel very busy, get stressed and the feeling that they cannot handle their work.
The feeling of being busy and stressed result from the illusion that we think that we need to be available at any moment, the increased use of e-mails, the increased competition, ambition and seeking of success, seeking of perfection, and the fear of losing a job or income. All these result in that the outcome of work suffers, the quality declines, it leads into splurge, delays, stress, exhaustion, sick days and absences occur,  collaboration and communication suffers, creativity suffers and innovation will be on hold, learning declines, and delegation slips out of mind. (Rytikangas 2008.)
By learning self-management it could help in all these situations. But the biggest issue here is to get the self-management practices into the organizations. In my opinion the managers could first take the practices in use for themselves, and in this way show the way for the rest of the employees so that they would not fear for the change.
Self-management is really about getting all the efficiency out of the working time, mastering the use of time, and pre-empting stress. To control the time is all about focusing and prioritizing tasks. This includes making conscious choices, focusing on the essential, learning to tolerate incompleteness, change and disorder, to develop oneself, taking care of oneself and his resources, and being merciful to oneself. Self-management can be learned by exploring openly and honestly our activity, identifying our work habits, becoming conscious of our strengths and weaknesses, and deliberately changing the methods.This means that we should be able to identify if tasks are relevant or not, remembering that multitasking often means more mistakes, and more costs while we do not have time for asking many bids, we might get fines for being late, and e.g. flights are more expensive closer to departure. In self-management we should also be aware of our professional, physical, social, mental, spiritual, and renewal condition. All these affect our general condition and who we are as a person.(Rytikangas 2008.)
Long Stephen (2011) wrote that “until executives can lead and manage themselves, they can’t manage and lead others” Long (2011) also continues that if managers do not have skills in self-management they will not have skills in risk analysis either. Managers should be able to create a vision and set the direction to achieve it. A good manager is also able to simplify things, so that the employees understand the case in question better, without losing the thread. (Long 2011; Kehusmaa 2010.)
Some managers are just thought to be good at self-management. Gutek Glenn (2011) wrote in his article about a manager that “had an incredible ability to do what needs to be done, when it needs to be done”.
Changes is often something that is feared in organizations because it is being seen as a threat to one selves rank, work, know-how, feeling of value or ability to cope with it (Kehusmaa 2010: 153).
In a learning organization the manageris demanded for creating a shared vision, coordinating the teams’ activity, spreading the systematic thinking, promoting creativeness, risk-taking and innovation, and inspiring to learn and act. This way highlights a shared making, participating, gives everyone ability to impact, and creates an organization that shares and makes the most of the knowledge they have. This way the organization moves as one towards the objectives. In a learning organization the individual have the opportunity to improve, there is a shared and common vision, and team learning is a part of the culture. The employee satisfaction, work capability, ability to learn, customer satisfaction, and the impacts on society are all outcomes form a learning organization. (Kehusmaa 2010: 145-148.)
4 Results

By adapting self-management working methods the organization can minimize dead time and utilizes it. Leaving things to the last minute can often mean that we cause stress to someone else. By doing things in hurry, and afterwards correcting mistakes, means that we are doing it twice in a way. Perfectionism can also be a way of wasting time. Archiving should be done in a practical way, so that information can quickly be found when needed. This saves time for not have to go through unnecessary papers. (Rytikangas 2008:83.) These are all methods to help us make the most out of our working time and get rid of the dead time.
There are a few methods how self-management can be adapted to work habits. The first one is called the Pareto principal, which is also known as the 80/20 rule. This can be applied in many ways. We should remember that 20% of our customers bring in 80% of our income. 20% of our products bring in 80% of our contribution margin. Furthermore we should remember that this can also be applied to our own work tasks; 20% of our work tasks are important and 80% less important. Another method is to divide your work tasks according to the ABC-work tasks. Firstly, there are the most importantA-tasks, which affect the result or the availability of the goods. Secondly, there are B-tasks. These are not as important as A-tasks. You should use moderately time and energy for these tasks. Thirdly, there are the C-tasks. These are tasks that are insignificant and do not perhaps need to be done at all or perhaps they can be delegated to someone else. (Rytikangas 2008:53-55.) The most important method in self-management is, however, to write things or tasks down, that need to be remembered. They might have to be done now, later or someday. They also might be big or small or anything in between, but when these are somewhere in a reliable memory our own memory capacity and energy can take a break. (Allen 2003).
There are also other methods for internalize the self-management principles, but here is a few of them. These should be kept in mind, when self-management principles are being taken as practices into an organization.
If the top management or the manager wants to promote the self-management practices he needs to first comply the practices in his own methods. This way he can promote the practices in the entire organization by talking about them, making them understandable, increasing the knowledge about them, enrolling them as a part of the vision, and making them a part of the working habits that are being emphasized. This way self-management practices will not face resistance from the employees and will be adapted to the working manners.
5 Discussion

I think that today’s businesses emphasize much on high-performance, results, hard-working environment, and business minded attitudes. Therefore there have also been many articles and studies describing how this influences workers and how they have enough strength to cope with the upbeat business life. Self-management is concerned with questions on how to organize our tasks, to do better plans, to focus on our jobs, to delegate tasks, to be more efficient, how to be better at decision-making and how to take care of our own development so that we can manage our own job tasks. If an organization could adapt these practices in to their entire organization and its methods I think that they could achieve such an environment, where high-performance, hard-work, results, and business minded attitudes are part of the operations. This is why I think that it would be important for organizations to learn about self-management and take themes from it to practice.
A good manager is also able to simplify things, so that the employees understand the matter in question better, without losing the thread. (Long 2011; Kehusmaa 2010.) At the same time changes is often something that is feared in organizations because it is being seen as a threat to one selves rank, work, know-how, feeling of value or ability to cope with it (Kehusmaa 2010: 153). By first taking the matters into practice for the managers could in this way help the entire organization to accept these issues better with less resistance. It could also help the workers to understand the matters in question better and in that way make it easier for them to accept the changes. By showing an example as manager the employees could also see how the matters in question are really meant in practice to be performed or used. I think that these methods should therefore be first put into operation through the management to help the implementation to the entire organization.
In a learning organization the individual have the opportunity to improve, there is a shared and common vision, and team learning is a part of the culture. The employee satisfaction, work capability, ability to learn, customer satisfaction, and the impacts on society are all outcomes form a learning organization. (Kehusmaa 2010: 145-148.) By taking the practices from self-management in use this is what could be achieved. When an organization could achieve this, they will also achieve a hard-working environment, where results, business minded attitude, and high-performance will be a part of the organizations culture. When the employees are happier with their work, through self-management practices, they will also perform better, which in turn will lead to a better performing, effective and productive organization. This is what organizations are trying to achieve continuously and this is how I think that they could achieve it. To encounter less resistance for the changes and get the new methods easier in use I think that the self-management practices should be taken into operation through the management. By showing a good example the manager can also show how it is meant to be done on practice or how we are supposed to perform. This makes it also easier for the employees to understand the matters more clearly.


6 Conclusion

Self-management as a topic is widely discussed, but in my opinion bringing the practices into use has gotten less attention. That is why I wanted to consider the alternative to takes these practices into use through the help of management. I think that we have seen through different literature references that this could be a good option, how to introduce self-management into organizations and take these practices into action. The reasons why self-management should be introduced to organizations have also been presented. The organization will most likelyachieveshared making, participating, and gives everyone ability to impact. This way the employees will be more satisfied and to their jobs better and more effective. This, in turn, will result in a more hard-working environment, where results, high-performance, and business minded thinking will be preferred. This again is what all businesses are trying to accomplish in the hard-working environment that has the power in the exciting business world.

