Leading in an era of uncertainty

INTRODUCTION
“These are scary times for managers in big companies. Even before the Internet and globalization, their track record for dealing with major, disruptive change was not good.” Christensen &Overdorf (2000:1)
During the last decades, the business environment has changedsignificantly. Organizations are continuously facing changes due to the increased competitive environment, technological development, and changes in the internal and the external circumstances. Although,this has provided a new set of opportunities and tools for companies to work with, this also means complexity and uncertaintyas it creates challenges for today’s organizations. Christensen & Overdorf (2000:1) argue that it is not about that leaders don’t see the changes coming; instead they believe that the problem lies in the leader’s way of thinking about the company’s capabilities.
As the opening sentence pointed out, even the most stable organizations are constantly facing new challenges as they are criticized for being too inflexible to react to the fast-paced and competitive global market. In fact, todays organizations can be replaced any minute, and according to Montgomery (2012) the most important question every business leader should answer is: “Does your company matter?” 
Success does not depend on one person, however, when operating in today’s complex world the importance of good leadership becomes critical.  The perception ofthat theconcept of a winner leadershipis“timeless” is starting to diminish as we are moving away from the individualistic view. Therefore, instead of imagining today’s leaders as “the hero who is front commanding the troops” we are taking an approach, where today’s complexity and challenges are receiving a bigger focus.Kotter (2001) agrees, and suggests that a leader can be defined following: 
“They [leaders] don't make plans; they don't solve problems; they don't even organize people. What leaders really do is prepare organizations for change and help them cope as they struggle through it.”
Pree speaks in the same token and emphasizes that “leadership is much more of an art, a belief, a condition of the heart, than a set of things to do.”Thereforeit is important to distinctthe most significant changes that have occurred during the recent decades and analyze how they have and will effect leadership?As Webber (2003) emphasizes “other challenges are ours to change”. 

The purpose with this paper is to expand current research on investigating how the complexity and challenges of the changing business environment hasaffected today’s leadership landscape. As Tirozzi (2001) notes, changing landscape requires new skills. Tirozzi (2001) underlines the importance of understanding and assessing the demographic, technological, social and economic trends in the horizon. Furthermore, this paper contributes to understanding of how the external factors are changing and will change the leadership role. Doing so, various events and changes are discussed. Despite the importance the external changes that has occurred during the recent decades, there are relatively few literature papers describing the relationship between change and leadership. Therefore, thispaper hopes to contribute to the discussion about the main challenges that leaders face resulted from the changes inenvironment.

1.2 Aim and contribution
This study aims at finding in-depth information about the current external factors and analyzes their effect on the leadership role.The reason to that this topic is analyzed is to gain a better understanding the impacts the current changes in the business environment and what impact they have on the leadership role. (M3:S1)

I hope to provide some recommendations to future leaders to consider while making choices and doing business in today’s shifting and complex business environment. The aim of this paper is to contribute to the current debate with existing literature supported by apersonal interview and quest-lecture notes.
1.3 Method
In order to answer the research question a personal interview is conducted. In addition, guest-lecture notes and a literature review are also presented. 
