Smoking ban: social effects.

Abstract


Introduction
Recently, enormous change in the treatment of smoking by both the public and policy makers took place. Smoking has become increasingly taboo in our society, and the discrimination against it keeps getting worse with more bans. Main attention is deserved by smoke-free workplaces approach in companies; however there has been wide interest in smoker-free workplaces as well. This requirement is becoming more and more widespread and raises questions of its appropriateness and future results. It is generally accepted that smoking by all means has only negative sides. Policy against smoking seems to be very aggressive and focused on achieving results already in short term period. But are these directive methods could not lead to unemployment of ‘great minds’ that are addicted? Will the economy be caused less from it rather than by employment of non-addicted?  
The most active position in discovering smoking policy issues is taken by National Health authorities in different countries which issue rules that many companies take as obligations. However, lots of researches also active in discovering this topic. Observations by Milton (1998) are focused of smokers’ costs for companies. James (2007) suggests that smokers influence on company performance to a large extend. Several researches focused on economic impact of smoking bans and found out both positive and negative results (Jonathan, Tomlin, 2009). Moreover, special attention is devoted to particular economic benefits of smoking (Richards, 2004). Seigel (2009) in his studies takes strong opposition to smoker-free issue claiming that “unemployment is also bad for health”.
As a result, views on this topic are diversified. However, opposition side is usually omitted due the privilege of main authority who dictates the rules. 
This paper tries to throw light on the shadowed side of the problem. Our idea is that economy of smoking is able to weaken the tension in society that now exists and to demonstrate “social cost” of smoking from different point of view.   
This paper is structured as follows: first of all current smoking policy trends are discussed; then basics of economy of smoking is under consideration; and finally some benefits of smoking in different prospective are highlighted. 


Literature review



How much smoking costs? 
Problems caused by smoking are usually looked under the smoking costs. There several classification of smoking costs. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) defines smoking costs as direct and indirect. However, to our mind the extended classification should took place. This is how National Business Group on Health points out these kinds of smoking costs: direct, indirect, societal and workplace 
Direct costs are money spent on health services. Direct costs include payments on healthcare benefits, disability, and compensation of an employee.
Indirect costs are spending related to not immediate treatment of disease. These costs cover lost wages, lost workdays, overtime premiums, costs related to using replacement workers, productivity losses related to unscheduled absences, and productivity losses of workers on the job.
However, these costs not only related to employers, it also affect society what brings societal costs in a form of poor health, injuries, and deaths that are a burden to society as a whole. Societal costs of smoking also include poor health related to secondhand smoke issue.
Another type of tobacco use costs is workplace costs that usually considered as employer direct and indirect costs and it is presented in details in table 1. 





[Table]

Business opportunity costs allow us to see to what extend smokers affect employers. Table 2 shows that according to NICE smokers bring to their employers costs that are equal to £7774 annually through wasting time on smoking. 

[Table]
According to BBC: “Smokers take on average half an hour from their working day to enjoy a cigarette, a survey suggests.” The study of 1,000 adults found that the average smoker took about three 10 minute breaks while at work to smoke. The Benenden Healthcare Society estimated that 290,000 working days were lost in the UK each year by smokers leaving the office. 
Many employers cite the lost productivity caused by constant cigarette breaks for smokers and constant fresh-air breaks for non-smokers. “I don’t care what it is,” says a human resources director at a Fortune 500 company who requested that HyperVocal not publish her name. “I once fired someone because he left the office every hour for a pudding break. He said that without pudding, he’d get a terrible headache, have trouble concentrating, and that he’d become uncontrollably lascivious. But seriously, he was doing like three cartons of Snack Packs a day on company time. It was a real problem.” 
The group said that smoking breaks were a "bone of contention" in workplaces. Many commentators have argued that this puts non-smokers at a disadvantage and is unfair because smokers choose to smoke. 
With regards to world database of smoking statistics the percentage of smokers by job type looks as follows: 16% of professionals, 20% of managers, 26% of supervisor, 32% of manual workers. 

Smoke-free zone
Smoking ban issue is not a new one and it takes it root back to 1590 when Pope Urban VII during his short reign as pope declared that anyone "took tobacco in the porchway of or inside a church, whether it be by chewing it, smoking it with a pipe or sniffing it in powdered form through the nose"  The first building in the world to have a smoke-free policy was the Old Government Building in Wellington, New Zealand in 1876. However, this was over concerns about the threat of fire, as it is the second largest wooden building in the world. 
The smoking bans rational lies in the fact that smoking is optional and breathing is not. Therefore, smoke-free laws protect non-smokers from second-hand smoke effect. Laws on smoking bans have been introduced in many countries in different ways over last years. 
What is more, such laws may decrease the healthcare costs, improve work productivity and lower business cost of labor that could lead to creating community that is more attractive for employers. Moreover, smoking cessation reduce risk of fire in areas with explosive hazard, decrease costs on ventilation, make food, pharmaceutical and other this kind of places cleaner, and in general can healthier environment. 
Active position is taken by the World Health Organization which activity aimed in creating an environment where smoking is more difficult and acceptance of smoking by society itself is eliminated in everyday life. 
However, smoking ban is a controversial issue. Most popular point of criticism of smoking ban is the violation of personal rights. Others say it is hypocritical to ban cigarettes and then continue to tax these harmful products. This is a major argument, because many countries receive high amounts of revenue from the tax on cigarettes. Also smoking adversely affects certain types of businesses, for instance bars or restaurants. Though, another side of a coin is also important. Of course, businesses that are under smoking ban must provide outdoor smoking areas, but many businesses found out that their performance increases because non-smokers fells more comfortable in the environment than they were when smoking was allowed. In restaurants, smokers are no longer lingering over cigarettes over conversation and taking up a table that a new customer who will have a new bill could be using. When smokers pay their bill and leave to smoke, then a new customer can use the table, bringing in more income to the restaurant or bar. 
Referring to the effect of smoking bans, Dan Plonka of Bingo Caller Magazine said, "Some organizations have completely lost every single penny of profit – their losses have been over 100 percent. Other organizations are down about 10 to 15 percent; most are down about 50 percent of the profits."
Bowling business faces another unique problem – shoes. A smoker is not allowed to step outside for a smoke while wearing bowling shoes. They'd have to change their shoes twice each time they wanted to smoke. Most of them won't bother. “Laurel Bowl” had been successful bowling club for thirty-four years before California's statewide ban. Three hundred and eighty-five league bowlers quit because of the ban, which cost the business $200,000 in annual revenues. 
Business that sell and service air cleaning units are affected as well. If there are no smokers, there's no reason to buy an air cleaner. If one was purchased, there's no need to use it, so no service is meant.
In 2004 The Empire State Restaurant and Tavern Association funded a study that was conducted by Ridgewood Economic Associates. It concentrated on small, independent taverns. They found that bars and taverns in the state have lost about 2,000 jobs, $28.5 million in salary payments and $37 million in gross state product.

Smoker-free policy
Recently, a new trend in smoking policies on workplace has emerged: a shift from “smoke-free” to “smoker-free” workplace policies. These policies, instituted by employers but often promoted by public health or tobacco control organizations, refuse employment to smokers; some companies even dismiss already employed employees if they do not quit in a prescribed time period. Nuffield Proactive Health surveyed managerial level employers, with 73% saying they would choose a non-smoking candidate over a smoker.
Employers only follow new streams of policy, while tobacco control movement has played huge role in promoting it. For example, the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) ASSIST manual (Strategies to Control Tobacco Use In the United States: A Blueprint for Public Health Action in the 1990’s) suggests hiring of nonsmokers on preferential basis what is aimed in decreasing cigarette consumption: “Economic incentives serve to reduce consumption of tobacco products by increasing, either directly or indirectly, the costs of using these products. In this section, three economic incentive policies are examined: (1) higher excise taxes on cigarettes, (2) preferential hiring and promotion of nonsmokers, and (3) insurance premium differentials for smokers and nonsmokers.”
However, smoker-free policies are still highly criticized. Smoking is treated as dangerous for people’s life, though there is no policy that will ban skiing or doing kayak shark rafting, which is much riskier. 
All human activities carry costs that have to be weighed against their benefits. Economist Kip Viscusi reports that, in the U.S., the annual death risk from motor vehicle accidents is 1/5,000. In France, 115,000 skiers are injured every year, and more than 50 killed. Usually, 390 Canadians drown, and 5 are killed by lightning. People take risks into account while making choices supposedly. So the question is “why does the state try and persuade individuals to quit smoking, but not skiing?”


