Online shopping: The Role of Shopping Motives
INTRODUCTION
Since the late 1990s, the number of consumers using the internet for shopping has been growing rapidly (Childers, Carr, Peck & Parsons, 2001). Some researchers explain this growth by the Internet’s ability to provide consumers with more products and services to choose from, more information about availability, and often at more affordable prices than in traditional brick and mortar stores (Rajamma, Paswan & Ganesh, 2007). Furthermore, the Internet enables one to buy from any location, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week (Mathwick, Malhotra & Rigdon, 2001). Indeed, convenience and efficiency have been identified as important motives for online shopping (Childers et al. 2001). However, studies that shows that many consumers engage in online shopping activities without any concrete intention of making purchases have started to emerge.  While some consumers engage in online shopping to maximize utility, others tend to shop for freedom, fun, sensory stimulation, and enjoyment (Holbrook & Hirschman, 1982; Overby & Lee, 2006). Indeed, consumers shop online for both utilitarian and hedonic purposes (Bridges & Florsheim, 2007). 
Although research into online shopping motives has expanded substantially in recent years, relatively few studies have considered hedonic factors associated with online shopping (Overby & lee, 2006; Wolfinbarger & Gilly, 2001). The purpose of this study is to examine the influence of different motives affecting online shopping from utilitarian and hedonic points of view and extend the current knowledge of online shopping behavior. The paper is organized as follows. Following this introduction, section 2 presents an overview of the internet as a contemporary buying environment. Second, drawing on relevant literature, a number of motives for shopping online are presented and formed into a conceptual model. Next, the findings of the study are presented. Finally, implications and directions for future research are discussed. 


LITERATURE REVIEW
Background on shopping motives
Beginning with Tauber’s (1972) seminal work on”why do people shop”, numerous studies have been conducted to investigate consumers underlying reasons for shopping, both in traditional brick-and-mortar settings (e.g. Babin, Darden & Griffin 1994) as well as online (e.g. Childers et al. 2001; Menon & Kahn 2002). Shopping motives have been defined as “the drivers of behavior that consumers to the marketplace to satisfy their internal needs” (Jin & Kim 2003:399).  Although research has identified a plethora of shopping motives, most researchers tend to dichotomize them into utilitarian and hedonic values and motives (Batra & Ahtola 1991; Babin et al. 1994; Childers et al. 2001). Utilitarian values reflect shopping with a “work mentality” (Babin, Darden & Griffin 1994) where the shopping activity is understood as a means to accomplish some predefined end (Holbrook & Hirschman 1982). Childers et al. (2001:513) add that “in the utilitarian view, consumers are concerned with purchasing products in an efficient and timely manner to achieve their goals with a minimum of irritation”.  In contrast to utilitarian value, hedonic value is more subjective, in which consumers seek fantasies, fun and sensory stimulation rather than a means to obtain a desired product or service (Holbrook & Hirschman 1982). Similarly, Babin et al. (1994) define hedonic as being “more subjective and personal than its utilitarian counterpart, and resulting more from fun and playfulness than from task completion” (p.646). 
Childers et al. (2001) argue that both value dimensions play an important role in online shopping. Scholars have also noted that utilitarian and hedonic values are often intertwined with one another (Babin et al. 1994) and that consumers may seek both simultaneously when shopping online (Wolfinbarger & Gilly 2001). 
Utilitarian shopping motives online
Most prior research on online shopping has assumed that the primary motives underlying online shopping are utilitarian motives such as convenience (Childers et al. 2001), product selection (Wolfinbarger & Gilly 2001) and accessibility (Alba, Lynch, Weitz, Janiszewski, Lutz & Wood 1997). For instance, convenience is manifested in the fact that online stores offer the consumer limited 24 hour access and the opportunity to shop at multiple locations at the same time (Wolfinbarger & Gilly 2001). Furthermore, the internet offers an infrastructure that enables the consumer to locate merchants and items much more efficiently than in traditional retail outlets (Alba, Lynch, Weitz, Janiszewski, Lutz & Wood 1997). In addition, Wolfinbarger & Gilly (2001) found that lack of sociality and social interaction was a dominant motive among utilitarian shoppers. The self-service nature of online stores allows consumers to avoid crowding and intrusive sales clerks, thus enabling more freedom and control over the shopping process. (Wolfinbarger & Gilly 2001) 
Hedonic shopping motives online
Despite the fact that online shoppers are primarily driven by utilitarian needs (Childers,et al. 2001), there is also ample evidence that suggest that hedonic values are prevalent motives in online shopping (Bridges & Florsheim 2007). For instance, for some consumers, online shopping is perceived primarily as a leisure-time activity, and for them the act of shopping and browsing around may be a source of pleasure in itself (Babin et al. 1994; Menon & Kahn 2002). In this view, an online shopping experience is not only related to a specific task, but also associated with seeking pleasure, arousal and enjoyment (Mathwick, Rigdon & Malhotra 2001; Overby & Lee 2006). 

METHODOLOGY

FINDINGS
The findings in this section are presented according to themes using the informants’ own statements. The statements are followed by a reference to the respondents gender (F=female, M=male) and age. 
DISCUSSION
