Exceptional Circumstances in Compulsory Licensing of IPR


1. Introduction

   Intellectual property rights are valuable assets to companies. Particularly licensing
intellectual property rights is an efficient way for companies to pursue profits. At the
same time business relations in general are becoming more complex and competition
between companies is harsh. Consequently, there are multiple competing interests to be
fulfilled in today's market. In the continuously developing market system intellectual
property regulation and regulation concerning competition tend to collide. Thus, the
legislator as well as the authorities applying the law should be able to do a justifiable
evaluation between the interests of competition law rules and the rules concerning
intellectual property rights and thus design the best possible decision in every case.


   This paper examines the possibilities of a company that is in a dominant market
position, according to the EU competition law rules, to refuse to give a competing
company a right to use its intellectual property right. Moreover, this paper studies the
situations under which an intellectual property right may be subject to compulsory
licensing under Article 102 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
(TFEU). The compulsory licensing is considered possible under certain exceptional
circumstances defined in the case law of the EU. Consequently, this paper describes
some parts of the legal praxis of the EU.


  Furthermore, the boundaries of the exceptional circumstances in which a compulsory
license will be granted are still being tested. In addition, most of the legal literature
analyzing the concept of compulsory licensing has concentrated on evaluating either
some parts of the exceptional circumstances or evaluating the situation mainly from a
legal viewpoint (e.g. MacQueen et al. 2008). This partial and merely legal approach is
not sufficient as there are also economic aspects in the cases. For example Korah (2006)
demands more discussion on economic theory in relation to the decisions of EU courts.
There are only a few studies (e.g. Mylly 2009, Vezzoso 2006, Kanter 2006) that analyze
the exceptional circumstances from an economic point of view. Therefore this paper
contributes to understanding the economic aspect of the evaluation of a refusal to
license.


    This study addresses three questions. Firstly, as the owner of intellectual property
right has an exclusive right to exploit the intellectual property right for example through
licensing, the owner can prevent competition in relation to the subject matter of the
right, but when can a refusal of licensing be an abuse of a dominant market position?
Secondly, in what circumstances is a company in a dominant market position allowed to
refuse a license? Moreover, are these circumstances practical and reasonable from an
economic viewpoint?


    The remainder of this paper is divided into four sections. The following section
provides an overview of the applicable EU legislation and principles. The second
section presents some EU case law and the third section discusses the justifiability of
compulsory licensing from an economic point of view. The concluding section presents
a summarized overview of the current situation and research findings.


2. Applicable legislation

2.1 Licensing


    Licensing is a central feature of the exploitation of intellectual property. Intellectual
property right can be exploited through licensing; intellectual property licensing
agreements are simply ordinary agreements between the right holder and third parties
(licensees) to determine how, when and where and for how much the third party can
exploit the intellectual property of the owner. In other words, the licensor takes
advantage of his right by granting licenses. That is to say the licensor pursues financial
benefit in the form of royalties and license fees. Moreover, licensing is an effective way
for the licensor to make profit especially in cases where the licensor himself is not able
to use the right to its full extent due to lack of resources or expertise.

    As an exception to the general rule of the freedom of contract, in some situations the
contents of the license agreement can be restricted due to some compulsory provisions.
In these situations the owner of the intellectual property right is not allowed to choose
the contracting party freely and he might not be able to even choose whether to make
the agreement or not. Furthermore, such obligation to compulsory licensing can also
arise in individual cases, which are the subject of this study, when a company is
considered abusing its dominant market position.


2.2 The common market and the abuse of a dominant market position


    One of the main objectives of the EU is to guarantee the functionality of the internal
market. Therefore there should not be any trade barriers between the member states.
However, because the intellectual property rights as exclusive rights are in nature
potential to erect barriers to free trade, the free movement of goods and creation of a
common market is threatened to some extent by the exercise of intellectual property
rights. Accordingly, it is apparent that as well as the EU legislation, also the legal praxis
of the EU plays a significant role in determining the boundaries for competition as well
as for intellectual property owner's rights.

    Furthermore, the promotion of market integration is one of the key objectives of EU
competition policy. Thus the EU is trying to foster competition and accordingly it has
set some legislative boundaries for the companies that operate in the common market.
The aim is to ensure that free trade is not compromised by unacceptable, restrictive or
monopolistic practices. Competition law rules applying to companies that enjoy
economic strength and concerning the abuse of a dominant market position are in article
102 TFEU which provides as follows:

            Any abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position within the
            internal market or in a substantial part of it shall be prohibited as
            incompatible with the internal market in so far as it may affect trade between
            Member States.

            Such abuse may, in particular, consist in:

            (a) directly or indirectly imposing unfair purchase or selling prices or other
            unfair trading conditions;

            (b) limiting production, markets or technical development to the prejudice of
            consumers;

            (c) applying dissimilar conditions to equivalent transactions with other trading
            parties, thereby placing them at a competitive disadvantage;

            (d) making the conclusion of contracts subject to acceptance by the other
            parties of supplementary obligations which, by their nature or according to
            commercial usage, have no connection with the subject of such contracts.




    It should be underlined that according to the article 102, only the abuse of a
dominant market position ­ market power - not the position in itself, is forbidden.
Generally abuse has been described as conduct by a dominant firm which seriously and
unjustifiably distorts competition or causes it further to weaken. Abusive behavior can
for example be price discrimination.

    The relevance of article 102 for the owners of intellectual property rights can be seen
in the context of licensing. Firstly, a refusal to enter an agreement with a third party
does not automatically mean a contravention with the article. However, in some
circumstances it may be abusing of a dominant market position to refuse to license.

Hence, what are the rules concerning compulsory licensing? In order to address this
question, the European courts have sought to develop rules which balance the interests
of the holder of the intellectual property right with those of the creation of a common
market and competition law. Accordingly, some case law will be examined in the
following section.


3. Compulsory licensing ­ case law of the EU

     In one of the first cases concerning the question as to when and if a refusal to license
a third party might amount to an abuse of a dominant position -the case Volvo v Veng -
the European Court of Justice (ECJ) stated that the mere refusal to license a third party
did not amount to an abuse of a dominant position.

     Later on ECJ outlined in the Magill case (Radio Telefis Eireann (RTE) and
Independent Television Publications Ltd (ITP) v Commission ) that the exercise of
intellectual property right and the refusal of a license do not automatically pose an
infringement on competition rules, but in certain circumstances they can lead to an
abuse of a dominant position. ECJ defined those exceptional circumstances in which a
refusal to license may constitute an instrument of abuse. These are where there is no
actual or potential substitute for the product for which the license is sought and there is
a demand for a product which is not provided by the rights owner. In addition, the
refusal to license must not be objectively justified and interference in a secondary
market has to occur.

     After the Magill case, the ECJ gave its decision in IMS Health case (IMS Health
GmbH & Co. OHG v NDC Health GmbH & Co. KG). In this case, after referring to
Volvo v Veng and Magill, the court underlined that an exclusive right of reproduction
forms a part of an intellectual property owner's rights. A refusal to grant a license, even
by a dominant company, could not in itself constitute an abuse of article 82 EC
(currently 102 TFEU) except in exceptional circumstances.

The ECJ stated that the refusal by a company which holds a dominant position to grant a
license to another company constitutes an abuse of a dominant position where the
following conditions are fulfilled: the refusal must prevent the emergence of a new
product for which there is a potential demand; the refusal cannot be objectively justified
and the refusal must be such as to exclude competition in a secondary market.

     With the above mentioned IMS Health decision, ECJ reinforced the interpretation
adopted before. The court also reinforced the necessity of the prerequisites ­ the
exceptional circumstances- where fulfilling the undertaking in a dominant position can
be considered abusing its position. Nevertheless, the court has generally emphasized
the exceptionality of compulsory licensing.

     The most recent case concerning the compulsory licensing of intellectual property
rights is the Microsoft case. In the Microsoft case, one of the most famous cases, both
the European Commission and later on the Court of First Instance (CFI) concluded that
Microsoft had abused its dominant position in the PC operating system market by
refusing to supply competitors the necessary interface information for their products to
interoperate with Windows, and hence to compete viably in the market.

     The CFI concluded that while companies are as a rule free to choose business
partners, is some circumstances a refusal to supply by a dominant company can
constitute an abuse if a dominant position unless it is objectively justified. Moreover, the
exercise of the exclusive right by the owner of the intellectual property right may give
rise to such an abuse only in exceptional circumstances. The CFI stated that there were
three preconditions for the exceptional circumstances: the refusal must relate to a
product or service indispensable to the exercise of an activity on a neighboring market,
the refusal must be such as to exclude any effective competition on that market, and the
refusal must prevent the appearance of a new product for which there is demand.

     In addition, the Commission had concluded in its decision that it was entitled to take
account of exceptional circumstances other than those identified by the ECJ in the
Magill-case for example. In spite of this Commissions statement, the CFI considered
that first of all, should be decided whether the circumstances identified in previous
cases, Magill and IMS Health, were also present in this case. Only if it would find that
one or more of those circumstances were absent the Court would proceed to assess the
particular circumstances invoked by the Commission that is the other circumstances.


5. Economical evaluation of exceptional circumstances as a whole


5.1 Competing interests


     Evidently, the essence of an intellectual property right is that it gives the owner a
monopoly in the subject matter of the right for a declined period of time. The owner
strives to obtain economic return with the intellectual property right. Generally, in
Europe it is considered pro-competitive to grant strong protection to intellectual
property rights. On the contrary, freedom to copy is a cornerstone of competition and
it operates to minimize monopoly profits. What is right balance in the market then and
what is the right amount of intellectual property protection? How far does the
requirement for a free trade go, what are the needs of customers and when can
compulsory licensing be justified?

     When assessing the justifiability of compulsory licensing, three kinds of interests
have to be taken into account. Such are those of the company in a monopoly position,
competing companies and consumers. A company in a monopoly position is aiming at
reducing the transaction costs by refusing to license. Furthermore, as a sole
manufacturer and seller of a product, a company could define the price of their product
in the market and maximize their monopoly profits. First of all, Motta (2007), among
others, has argued that the prospect of having market power (i.e. some profit) represents
the most powerful incentive for firms to innovate and invest. Regulation concerning
competition should therefore ensure that firms will be able to enjoy the rewards for their
investments. On this account, Motta (2007) further states that "as a consequence, drastic
structural remedies must be carried out only in truly exceptional circumstances."

     Furthermore, in addition to taking into account the encouragement of the incentives
to innovate of the company in a monopoly position, also the public interest should be
taken into account. The public interest can be jeopardized if private rights are exercised
in a way that means that the property in question is not used or exploited in a public
setting. Compulsory licensing is an excellent example of a situation where public and
private interests are competing. If the competing companies cannot enter the market and
do not have access to essential facilities, there is no competition. Lack of competition
means usually higher prices for consumers. The aim with competition law would be to
enhance consumer welfare. Furthermore, in some cases compulsory licensing is hence
justified in order to protect consumer welfare although it restricts the actions of the
company that has a monopoly.

     In relation to balancing the public interest to the interests of the company in a
dominant position, a specific test was used that focused on innovation incentives in the
Microsoft case. This test was used when deciding whether the refusal to license could
be objectively justified. The test included an evaluation between interests: the
company's refusal to supply cannot be objectively justified under article 102 TFEU if
the negative impacts of a compulsory license on the dominant company's incentives to
innovate are outweighed by its positive impact on the innovation level in the entire
industry. In the Microsoft case, the possible negative impact of the order to supply
interface information on Microsoft's incentives to innovate was outweighed by its
positive impact on the level of innovation of the whole industry. According to Vezzoso
(2006), such a refusal to deal could constrain the consumer choice, lower input, raise
prices and therefore produce allocative inefficiency. Vezzoso (2006) furthermore
concluded that the test however was controversial from both economic as well as legal
point of view.

     All in all, in general compulsory licensing is justifiable in situations where a
company in a dominant market position has the only access to an inevitable facility and
this causes a restrain to competition. The inevitable facility should be essential and
inevitable to other companies for example for entering the market. The fear of
compulsory licensing might be a hindrance of innovation to the company in a dominant
position if it is aware that the innovation is so essential to others that the company will
be obliged to license it. However, in these cases the company might freely draft
licensing agreements and get the profits that way.

     According to Kanter (2006), compulsory licensing may be used only in cases where
other less restrictive measures are likely to be insufficient in addressing the anti-
competitive conduct. Furthermore, authorities should draft the compulsory licensing as
narrowly as possible and competition authorities must not intervene too rashly and
reduce the incentive to innovate. I agree with Mr. Kanter and also other authorities, in
addition to competition authorities, should address the issue similarly.




5.2 Exceptional circumstances as guidelines


     According to Kanter (2006), economic reasoning and common sense suggest that
strong intellectual property rights encourage productivity, investments and innovation.
On the other hand, if a firm has control over an essential facility this can undermine
competition and reduce productivity and lessen the incentive to innovate. Consequently, defining what is the right balance between these interests is not an easy
task.

     Thus, are the exceptional circumstances defined in the case law of the EU a
reasonable way of evaluating situations concerning the justifiability of compulsory
licensing? The conditions that the courts have laid down for the exceptional
circumstances for compulsory licensing in case law can be considered as guidelines.
The problem is, however, that how can a company that operates in the marketplace be
able to recognize the conditions for abuse early enough or at all during the course of
business? Are the conditions that the courts made in the mentioned cases so flexible that
all relevant factors in the market can be taken into account? In my opinion, the rules are
reasonable, but there should be some flexibility when the circumstances are assessed by
the courts in the future.

     I also consider it to be possible that other circumstances could be taken into account
as the Commission has suggested in its decision in the Microsoft case. Moreover, I
agree with Korah (2006) about the fact that the Commission's decision in the Microsoft
case was controversial and more discussion on economic theory is needed.

     As can be reasoned on the basis of legal praxis, compulsory licensing is possible in a
situation where a dominant firm owns or controls access to an essential facility. It then
may be pro-competitive to force the dominant company to grant access to the facility
provided that a refusal of access would have significant anti-competitive effects. The
possible anti-competitive effects are an important factor when the situations are
evaluated. According to Mylly (2009) the Magill decision marked the beginning of an
effects-based argumentation model. This means that the court based its decision on
considerations related to competitive effects.


6. The conclusions

     This study investigated the justifiability of compulsory licensing and the definition
of exceptional circumstances. According to the legal praxis of the European courts the
refusal by a company holding a dominant position to license a third party to use a
product covered by an intellectual property right cannot in itself constitute an abuse of a
dominant position within the meaning of article 102 TFEU.

      However, in exceptional circumstances the exercise of the exclusive right by the
owner of the intellectual property right may give rise to such an abuse. Evidently, as
mentioned, this is an exception about the general rules and aims of intellectual property
law. Additionally, it is an exception to the rule that companies are free to choose their
business partners. By giving guidelines on compulsory licensing, the EU is aiming in
assuring effective competition and furthermore the free movement of goods.

      A refusal of licensing is considered an abuse of a dominant market position if the
exceptional circumstances that have been assessed by the courts on an ad hoc-basis are
fulfilled. On the basis of the case law, the refusal must relate to a product or service that
is indispensable (essential), the refusal excludes effective competition on the market and
the refusal prevents new products from entering the market provided that there is a
demand for those products. If these conditions are fulfilled, it has to be also stated that the
refusal cannot be objectively justified. Moreover, it is not considered at the moment to be
possible that other circumstances would be taken into account according to the
Microsoft decision.

      Due to the case by case definition of these exceptional circumstances, the situation is
somewhat unclear for the companies operating in the market. On one hand, the
companies should protect their innovations with intellectual property rights and use
those for gaining economic interest. The owner of the intellectual property right should
have a reasonable scope for the right; the owner should have an advantage. On the
other hand, the companies should be able to take into account the rules of competition
law and act accordingly.

      On that account, a balance between these interests needs to be found. A danger is
that competition law affects intellectual property rights in a way that might inhibit
innovation. Already the rights of the owners of intellectual property law have been
shaped (mostly limited) to a great degree by competition law. By fulfilling the
competing interests, the market could work effectively and the incentive to innovate
would exist.

      Accordingly, currently the courts do the evaluation between these interests. In my
opinion, it is economically efficient to do the evaluation in these matters case-by-case,
taking into account the specific features of each case although this causes some
uncertainty in the market. Strict rules might not be the right tool for guiding companies
in their market behavior as the markets are constantly changing and general
technological development goes further and further.

In addition, as the decisions of the courts have significant effects on the market, the
efficient evaluation of the facts in the cases by courts needs not only expertise in legal
issues, but also in economic issues. Idealistically, the decisions in these cases should be
legally and economically sustainable. In my opinion, the economic aspect and
especially the economic effects on the companies in the cases should be emphasized
more.


