Drivers and Barriers for Finnish businesses to ”go green”
1. Introduction
Environmental issues are have been researched in recent years by both scholars (Kovács 2008; Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008; Mont &Leire 2009) and companies (BearingPoint 2008). Companies try to be more socially responsible, and through this companies also try to act in a more environmentally friendly way. Part of corporate social responsibility (CSR) is corporate environmental responsibility (CER). CER includes stronger interaction between companies and their environment, the media, the industry associations, the company’s own supply chain with all of its suppliers and customers and policy makers. (Kovács 2008)
Consumers and customers of the company are believed to have the greatest influence for companies to become more environmentally aware (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008). Climate change is seen as a real threat and companies who market themselves as environmentally friendly tend to attract environmentally aware consumers. One way of becoming more environmentally friendly is to change the supply chain to a green supply chain. BearingPoint (2008; p. 3) defines a Green Supply Chain as: “A process in which the total environmental impact generated throughout the lifecycle of a product or service is measured and systematically reviewed against targets, with appropriate actions being taken to continuously reduce the environmental consequences”. Green supply chains tend to have reduced packaging and waste and they also continuously asses their suppliers and vendors on their environmental performance. Green supply chains may also include development of more eco-friendly products which reduce carbon emissions, or reduce carbon emissions associated with transport of goods. (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008) It can, however, be difficult for companies to make sure that their supply chains are green from beginning to end, as supply chains in the world today have grown bigger than they were before the industrialization. Kovács (2008) points out that research has a tendency to focus on the focal company and the immediate suppliers and distributors. Companies have to know all of their suppliers and the supplier’s suppliers and they also have to know their distributors and buyers in order to make sure that the whole supply chain is and stays green (BearingPoint 2008). 
The research paper will start with a literature review of green supply chains and corporate environmental responsibility. Drivers and barriers will be identified in the green supply chain context. The methodology will be presented after the identification of drivers and barriers. After that an analysis is made by how the drivers and barriers are perceived by the Finnish industry. The research paper will end in a conclusion about the drivers and barriers, the conclusion will include both limitations of the research and suggestions for future research.

2. Green supply chain
A typical supply chain considers a supply chain from the raw material to manufacturing and from manufacturing to the distribution to the consumer. A green supply chain, also called the extended supply chain, includes to this the reverse chain that brings the product backward in the chain to being remanufactured, re-used or recycled. The green supply chain considers a products whole life cycle. (Beamon 1999; Bearing Point 2008)
The green supply chain thinking has grown first from businesses changing their supply chains to more environmentally friendly because of regulations or legislation. The next step for businesses was to coordinate and integrate the environmental aspects to their supply chains. The third step for businesses has been to make proactive plans to guard themselves against environmental liabilities, like managing their pollution on a level that is accepted by law. The three first steps follow the first stage in the evolution of environment management, which is risk management and includes waste management and pollution control. This first stage had its start in the 1970s. The fourth step already includes that the businesses try to prevent pollution instead of only controlling it and keeping it on an accepted level. The step also includes waste minimization, which follows the second stage in the evolution of environment management. The second stage in the evolution began in the middle of the 1980s. In the last step businesses have a global concern about the entire product life cycle and also view the environmental quality as part of the Total Quality Management of the business. This is also supported by the last stage in the evolution of environmental management which has begun in the middle of the 1990s. (Beamon 1999)
The green supply chain is a semi-closed loop, where the whole life cycle of a product is considered. The product first makes its way through production and is distributed to consumers. The consumer has then a responsibility to take the used product to collection stations which should be provided by the businesses either as part of their own operations or as an outsourced part of the business. From the collection stations the used products are shipped back to the manufacturer who then decides whether to remanufacture, re-use or recycle the product. (Beamon 1999; BearingPoint 2008; Kovács 2008)
In order for a supply chain to be green the suppliers need to be assessed as well. The suppliers need to be environmentally aware, but it depends on how critical the supplier is for the focal company, how the supplier is assessed. (Hamner 2006) A critical supplier may be audited several times in a year when a less critical supplier may only be assessed by their environmental reputation. Some businesses collaborate with their most critical suppliers in finding new environmentally friendly technology. (Kovács 2008)

3. Drivers and Barriers
In this chapter the drivers and barriers for businesses to change their supply chains to green supply chains will be identified. The drivers and barriers will be presented from both an external view and from an internal view. The drivers will be presented first and the barriers will follow after that.
3.1. External drivers
External drivers are in some cases a result of stakeholder pressure and in other cases it is an issue of regulations (Mont & Leire 2009). The different stakeholders can be customers, competitors, society and suppliers (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008; Mont & Leire 2009). 
State legislation and regulation is probably the first driver for businesses to become more environmentally aware. State legislation have become in recent years stricter when it comes to environmental issues, the latest in the European union is the sulfur directive which states that the ships that sail on the European waters are only allowed to have a 0.1 percent sulfur content in fuel as of 2015 (Council of the European Union 2012). Regulation drives companies to become more environmentally friendly, but it is only the first step. Businesses also need to be motivated to change their supply chains in other ways, such as in hopes of having monetary benefits from it (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008).  
Customers can be very strong drivers for businesses to change their supply chains to more green. For example customers can chose not to buy a product if they believe that there is a similar product on the market that is manufactured in a greener way. Customers can be driven by the end consumers who demand products to be greener, and when the customers see that the end consumer is getting more environmentally aware, they in turn ask businesses that provide them with products to become more environmentally friendly. (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008)
Competitors may drive businesses to become more environmentally friendly by setting new norms in an industry. Competitors may also drive businesses to strive after first mover advantage, and in this way try to find new more environmentally friendly parts to their supply chain. This will also help businesses gain competitive advantage. By being more environmentally friendly businesses can reduce waste and be leaner, which in turn will show as improvements in a business performance. (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008; Mont & Leire 2009)
Media and society have a big say in businesses attempts to become environmentally friendly. Media will make people more aware of environmental and societal issues, and this can affect a business in a negative way. Businesses are then driven by society to make environmentally friendly decisions, and gain a reputation of being environmentally friendly. By having a good reputation, people who have become more aware of environmental issues, will consume the businesses products. (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008; Mont & Leire 2009)
Suppliers rarely act as a driving force, but as the environment is getting more attention suppliers need to cooperate with businesses so that they both become more environmentally friendly (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008). Businesses that intend to be greener should be driven to find suppliers that have the same agenda. 
3.2. Internal drivers
Internal drivers often relate to employees concerns about the environment or the working conditions of the people who make the businesses products in different countries (Mont & Leire 2009). Other internal drivers stem from other organizational factors, such as investor pressure and policy entrepreneurs (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008). Investor pressure can partly be motivated with investors being environmentally aware. Investors may also be aware that reducing waste will result in reduced costs (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008), and by showing that the business is concerned about the working conditions and actively trying to improve them, consumers start to demand products from this company (Mont & Leire 2009). Policy entrepreneurs are employees of the business that make it their mission to get the business more involved in environmental and social issues. The policy entrepreneur can either be driven by the wish to make the world a better place but also by the wish that they make themselves valuable to the business and improve their position in this way in the company. (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008)
Other internal driver can be a desire to improve quality by reducing waste and cost, values that the founders are instigating or that the owners wish to initiate. By improving quality consumers get a better product that is also greener as the quality improvement can be a result of reducing waste. As the waste is reduced the business reduces costs that are related to waste management and also material cost. (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008)
3.3. External barriers
Regulation may act as a barrier as well as a driver. Because of regulation innovation may be inhibited, as legislation can state deadlines that can be unreasonable for companies to reach or the legislation or regulation can state which technique is the best one available, that companies now have to use. This means that companies are not allowed to be innovative or do not have enough time to invent new techniques that might be even better than the current best technique. (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008) Legislation may also be unclear in how it should be integrated in the supply chain. This is a barrier as companies now are unsure of what they should do, and might not make deadlines or be unaware of how the legislation is related to their supply chain. (Mont & Leire 2009)
Different industries may have different barriers. They can be related to legislation that is different for the businesses country and the supplier country (Mont & Leire 2009). Industries may also have specific requirements or barriers that inhibit businesses to be environmentally aware. The industry specific barriers can affect different sectors in ether being proactive of reactive when it comes to environmental issues. (Walker, DiSisto & MvBain 2008) 
Another external barrier relates to suppliers. Suppliers may not be committed to the environmental strategy that the business and supplier have decided to follow. Also different management styles between supplier and the business can be a barrier as this can result to difficulties in cooperation and lack of commitment in joint operations. (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008; Mont & Leire 2009) Suppliers in other countries may have different legislation than that of the focal business, which means the if the legislation is less strict when it comes to environmental issues the supplier may not be willing to commit to the same degree as the focal business, because they might not see any cost reductions or other positive drivers to be more committed to the environmental strategy of the focal business (Mont & Leire 2009). Suppliers also need to be audited in order for the focal business to be sure of the commitment. Suppliers may be unwilling to share information, as they may be afraid of showing weaknesses or giving away information that will lead to other companies gaining competitive advantage. Auditing the suppliers may also be difficult if the supplier is cheating by having double bookkeeping or if the quality of the auditing is poor. The auditing may be poor because of high competition and the focal businesses wish to save money and by choosing a auditing company that has the lowest price. (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008; Mont & Leire 2009)
3.4. Internal barriers
Costs may be high in the beginning of implementing environmental supply chain thinking in a business. Changing suppliers may be expensive, as there is a learning process with new suppliers, and also a supplier with an already existing environmental strategy might be more expensive than one without. Management might only see the cost aspect in changing strategy to a more environmental friendly one. This may be a result of a lack of understanding how the environment can be incorporated to the businesses supply chain. (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008; Mont & Leire 2009)
By changing the supply chain to more environmentally friendly it means that the business will need to make organizational changes as well. Employees need to be educated and management also need to be educated first in how to incorporate environmental aspects into the supply chain and after that how to enhance and be proactive in environmental issues. (Walker, Di Sisto & McBain 2008; Mont & Leire 2009)
Businesses may also only use environmental practices as a marketing trick. This is called greenwash and is a result of management only advertising that they take the environment in consideration, but in reality they have not changed their supply chain or organization to a more environmental one. (Walker, DiSisto & McBain 2008)
4. Critical factors in Finland

5. Conclusions

