Performance of financial ratios in forecasting future stock prices
1. Introduction
Beating the market is something most investors want to achieve. However, choosing the stocks to complete that objective is difficult. Financial ratios provide investors with information concerning profitability, financial leverage, liquidity and market value (Bodie & Merton:76-90). The extent to which they can be used in predicting future stock performance has been widely debated. This paper sets out to study if it is possible to outperform the market and industry index by the means of analyzing different financial ratios. By analyzing key value drivers it will be possible to see whether there exists a significant correlation between exemplary financial ratios and excess returns between stocks and their industry indices.
The financial ratios have been chosen for the study on the basis of past research in which ratios seem to have statistical significance in predicting future stock returns.  The ratios chosen are the Price-to-Earnings ratio (P/E), Price-to-Dividend yield (D/P) and the Price-to-Book ratio. The research on the predictive power of these financial ratios has mostly taken place in the U.S and to some extent in the European market, but no significant data has been gathered from the Finnish market. (Ehrnrooth 2004: 3)  
1.1 The purpose of the study
The purpose of the study is to examine whether financial ratios can be used to forecast stock performance.
1.2 Restrictions of the study
This study will be limited to the Finnish Stock Market since it is an uncharted territory and will give extended knowledge about the use of the financial ratios in the Finnish market. To get a more comprehensive picture of the use of financial ratios, this study focuses on an industry instead of just independent companies. Choosing companies operating in the same industry enables one to see whether there are differences in the performance and use of financial ratios between companies. In other words, it makes the companies and financial ratios more comparable to each other.
Secondly, this study will be limited to backward-looking key value drivers. Evaluation of financial ratios based on future consensus estimates will not be considered, that will be left for further studies. 
Finally, there will be a time limit for the data. The time period used in the empirical study will contain financial data from a time period of ten years from 2001 – 2010.
1.3. The structure of the study
The structure of the study is as follows: section 2 will introduce the theory and background, section 3 will concentrate on the earlier research, section 4 will cover the data and the method of the study, section 5 will present the results, in section 6 will contain the discussion and analysis, and section 7 is the summary and conclusion of the paper.
2. Theory and Past research
According to the random walk-hypothesis, originally constructed by the French broker Jules Regnault, stock markets follow a random walk and cannot be predicted. The theory is associated with the efficient market hypothesis as it assumes information symmetry, that all the information that is relevant for a specific stock is reflected in its price. This would mean that “tomorrows price change will only reflect tomorrows news” (Malkiel, 2003:59). However, Campbell and Shiller argue that stock prices are driven by mean reversion. They claim that financial ratios such as P/E and D/P revert back to their historical averages and can thus be used in predictions of stock market performance. (Campbell & Shiller, 2001)
2.1. The Price-to-Earnings ratio (P/E)
The price per earnings ratio is calculated as following:
[Formula]
The numerator is the stock price, whereas the denominator is based on which type of P/E is calculated. The trailing P/E is calculated by dividing the stock price with the net income from the recent twelve months divided by the number of shares outstanding. 
A company is considered to have a low P/E ratio when the ratio is between 0-10. A low P/E can either be a sign of undervaluation (low nominator) or lower expectations of future earnings (high current denominator). Companies with a low P/E are usually referred to as value stocks. Stocks with a P/E of 17 and over are considered to have a high P/E and are usually referred to as growth stocks. A company can have a high P/E either because it is expected to increase its future earnings (low current denominator) or because of overvaluation (high nominator) or in some cases because both overvaluation and increased earnings expectations. A normal P/E ratio lies between 10 and 17. Companies that make losses have undefined P/E ratios. (Staubli, 2010: 11)
2.1.1. Past research on the Price-to-Earnings ratio (Anderson & Brooks) 
Anderson & Brooks 2006 claim that investing in value stocks (low P/E) gives a significantly better return than investing in growth stocks. The authors also point out that for the P/E ratio to be more accurate one ought to use an average of the past 8 years of company earnings. (Anderson & Brooks, 2006: 1063-1086)
2.2. The Price-to-Book ratio (P/B)
The Price-to-Book ratio is calculated as following:
[Formula]
The price-to-book value gives us the relationship between the current stock price and the most recent value of company equity. The value of equity is usually reported on a quarterly basis. If a company has a P/B ratio of 1, the market price of its assets is equivalent to the company´s market capitalization. A low P/B could be a sign of low valuation as the assets of the company are valued just a bit higher or even lower than their actual current value. In this sense P/B provides an investor with a picture of the relation between market capitalization and the value of company assets given that the company declared bankruptcy immediately. The P/B ratio is not very reliable in cross-industry analysis. This is because capital intensive industries tend to have much lower P/B ratios than less capital intensive industries. A high P/B means that investors believe that a company can generate more value from its assets. Another reason for a high P/B is that a company’s assets have a greater market value than their book value.  However, P/B has been criticized because it does not measure the value of intangible assets, such as goodwill, brand value or intellectual property. This means that the P/B ratio for companies with substantial intangible assets is misleading. (Staubli, 2010:3-4)
2.2.1. Past research on the Price-to-Book ratio (Fama & French, Trecartin)
According to the research of Fama & French (1992) low P/B stocks, or so called value stocks, experienced better returns than same sized companies with high P/B (Fama & French, 1992:427-465). However, Trecartin (2000) claims that the results are only valid for long-term investments, which he defines as an investment with a horizon above 5 years. According to Trecartin, factors such as sales growth, cash flow and size have more predictive on stock returns than the book-to-market ratio (Trecartin, 2000).
2.3. The Dividend-to-Price ratio (dividend yield)
Is calculated as following: 
[Formula]
The dividend yield informs the equity holder of how much cash flow per invested share an asset yields. A high dividend yield can either be a sign of undervaluation or a sign of negative future prospects that have been discounted in the stock price but not yet in the dividend. Furthermore, a low dividend yield might be an indication of overvaluation or improved future prospects which are discounted in the stock price but not yet in the dividend. In general a high dividend yield is considered as a positive sign, as it indicates that the company will have a strong future cash flow that enables it to pay a high dividend, since companies tend to be very reluctant in decreasing their dividend. A typical dividend yield is said to lie between 2-5 %. Furthermore, a positive aspect of using the dividend-price ratio is that companies cannot affect it with accounting measures in the same way as for example depreciations and amortizations affect earnings and thus the P/E ratio. (Vanninen, 2009:20)
2.3.1. Past research on the Dividend-to-Price ratio (Campbell & Shiller)
Campbell and Shiller 2001 have researched how efficient the dividend-price ratio is in predicting stock performance. According to their theory the dividend-price ratio reverts back to its mean and can based on that be used in predicting future trends. However, Campbell and Shiller point out that the prediction has to be made on a long-term basis, since the short-term predicting power seems to be insignificant. (Campbell et al. 2001)
3. Data
There are two types of main data: closing prices of year-to-year stock-market data and year-to-year data of financial ratios. 
3.1. Stock Market data
As stated in the introduction, the study will focus on a particular industry on the Finnish Stock Market, namely the Machinery industry. The companies included in the study are KONE Oyj, Cargotec Oyj, Konecranes Oyj, Metso Oyj and Wärtsilä Oyj Abp. These companies represent companies that are both listed on the OMX Helsinki Machinery_GI index, which functions as the industry index, as well as on the OMXH 25 index, which functions as the market index in this study (nasdaqomxnordic.com).  The OMXH 25 index will be used as the market index since it consists of the 25 most traded companies listed on the Nasdaq OMX Helsinki Stock Exchange and therefore is an able indicator of the market as a whole. Also, the selected companies are all listed on the OMXH 25 index which makes an adequate comparison of the market index, the industry index and the excess returns.
The stock-market data samples are collected from Kauppalehti.fi, Thomson One Banker and Omxnordic.com and contain financial data from a time-period from 1.1.2001 until 31.12.2010. The financial ratio data samples, which include the industry specific beta and return, are collected from Thomson One Banker, Kauppalehti.fi, Markets.fi.com and Stern.nyu.edu from the same time period as the stock-market data. Following the Capital Asset Pricing Model is introduced in order to define alpha which is needed as an explained variable in the study.
3.2. Capital Asset Pricing Model
The Capital Asset Pricing Model was developed by William Sharpe, John Lintner and Jan Mossin as a means of calculating the expected return on the market for a derivative with a beta differing from 0 or 1 (Brealey, Myers & Allen, 8thedt:189). The CAPM defines the expected return of a stock by calculating the risk free rate, beta and a market risk premium in the following formula:
[Formula]

The CAPM defines a stock’s risk as its sensitivity to the market (Koller, Goedhart & Wessels, 4thedt:294). The next step is to extract alpha from the Capital Asset Pricing Model. 
3.3. Alpha
Alpha is defined as the risk-adjusted performance measure of an investment. The excess return of a stock relative with a benchmark index return is the alpha of the stock. If an alpha of a stock is positive, with say 1.0, the stock has outperformed the benchmarked index by 1 %. The same rule applies respectively when a stock’s alpha is -1 %. In other words, if an alpha for a stock is equivalent to 0 the investment has earned a sufficient return for its risk. Alpha is also determined by comparing expected returns with actual returns. Alpha is derived from the Capital Asset Pricing Model as following:
[Formula]

Using the CAPM in this form outlines a regression line which is also known as the security characteristic line (SCL). The security characteristic line varies from the security market line (SML) by the fact that it outlines the performance of a derivative contra the market portfolio and lays out the alpha of an asset whereas the security market line represents the CAPM in a graphical form and outlines the beta of an asset (non-diversifiable risk). (Bodie, Kane & Marcus, 8thedt:288)
Alpha is applied to the study by analyzing whether the CAPM has correctly estimated the expected returns or if the there exists a difference between the expected and the actual returns. Alternatively, a study is made to examine whether the stock has outperformed the market index or not. 
The industry index and the market index (OMXH 25) will be implemented into two different models.
4. Method
This section presents the quantitative methods of the study. The empirical study is based on two methods. The first method will compare industry index performance with stock performance. In other words, the method studies the stock’s performance to the performance of its benchmarked index. The excess returns will then be implemented in a regression model as a y-variable, and the financial ratios will be put as x-variables and in this way be examined whether the ratios can significantly explain the excess returns.
In the second method the Capital Asset Pricing Model is utilized to determine the year-to-year alpha of a stock. By building up a panel data consisting of a stock’s excess return over the market index (alpha) and the financial ratios (P/E, P/B, Div-yield), the model is able to examine whether the financial ratios can significantly explain alpha. In the second method alpha functions as the explained variable and the financial ratios as the explanatory variables. This method is also known as the market model regression.
First of all a null-hypothesis (H0) and an alternative hypothesis (H1) have to be stated for each individual financial ratio. This is done in order to either accept or reject the hypothesis according to the results. In other words, if a test is significant the null-hypothesis will be rejected and the alternative hypothesis will be accepted. 
4.1. Determining the hypotheses for the financial ratios
4.1.1. Hypothesis for the Price-to-Earnings ratio
The individual hypotheses for the P/E ratio are:
H0 =	The Price-to-Earnings ratio has no significant power in predicting future stock returns / excess returns
H1 = 	The Price-to-Earnings ratio has significant positive power in predicting future stock returns / excess returns
The interpretation of the hypothesis is that the null-hypothesis will be accepted if the Price-to-Earnings ratio is above its historical average while the future stock performance is negative (Ehrnrooth, 2004:45).
4.1.2. Hypothesis for the Price-to-Book ratio
The individual hypotheses for the P/B ratio are:
H0 =	The Price-to-Book ratio has no significant power in predicting future stock returns / excess returns
H1 =	The Price-to-Book ratio has significant positive power in predicting future stock returns / excess returns
The interpretation of the hypothesis is that the null-hypothesis will be accepted if the Price-to-Book ratio is above its historical average while the future stock performance is negative (Ehrnrooth, 2004:46).
4.1.3. Hypothesis for the Dividend-to-Price ratio
The individual hypotheses for the Div-yield ratio are:
H0 =	The Dividend-to-Price ratio has no significant power in predicting future stock returns / excess returns
H1 =	The Dividend-to-Price ratio has significant negative power in predicting future stock returns / excess returns
The null-hypothesis is accepted if the level of the Dividend-to-Price ratio is unable to significantly predict the future stock price. In other words, the null-hypothesis is rejected if the Dividend-to-Price ratio is below its historical average while the future stock returns are positive. (Ehrnrooth, 2004:45)
4.2. The significance of the test
The t-tests will be one sided since we’ll study whether a financial ratio has significant positive (P/E, P/B) or negative (Div-to-price) predicting power. The test is different for the Div-yield ratio since the price-factor is situated in the denominator of the ratio (Ehrnrooth, A 2004:44-46). For a t-probability value to be significant, it needs to be below 5 %, even though 10 % significance can be motivated.
4.3. Purpose of the OLS regression function
OLS stands for Ordinary Least Squares and is used in multiple regression analysis. The purpose of the OLS is to create a function by reducing the sum of squared errors to its minimum from the data, thus estimating explanatory variable correlation with the explained variable. (Rosenqvist, G 2011:1) 
4.3.1. Estimation of the stocks versus index performance regression
The regression model (simplified form) for the stocks versus index performance is as following:
[Formula]
The results are to be interpreted as, for example, if the variable P/E rises by 1 then excess return will increase/decrease by the same amount as the estimator of the P/E variable. If there exists a negative correlation between the different variables it means that, for example, when P/E rises then P/B decreases. If there exists a positive correlation between the variables it means that, for example, when P/E rises then P/B also rises.  
4.3.2. Estimation of the market model regression
The regression model (simplified form) for the market model is as following:
[Formula]
The market model regression is interpreted in the same way as the stocks versus index performance regression.
4.4. Regression tests for further study
To determine the significance of the regression a series of tests are made. This is done in order to analyze the regression model further and to test the normal distribution of the regression. Tests made are normality-, heteroskedasticity-, auto-correlation-, multicollinearity- and stationarity tests (Rosenqvist, G 2011). These tests will be left for further study.
Results
Discussion
