Brand Avoidance: A study of young consumers’ motives behind avoiding a certain brand 


1. Introduction
In recent years, as a result of increasingly turbulent and competitive markets, the interest in branding has increased. (Rindell & Strandvik, 2010). Today’s consumers live in a world where the selection of products and services is enormous - and continuously growing. Brands also represent an important monetary asset for companies (Rindell, 2007). 
Actually the whole structure of consumption has changed entirely in 100 years. As consumption on necessities has been replaced by optional consumption, expenditure on clothes per person has grown nearly nine fold. (Statistics Finland, 2007) Especially young people seem to be quick to follow trends that are ‘in’. 
1.1. Research problem
Most of the research in the area of brand management has focused on why people prefer and consume certain brands, where as fewer studies examine reasons behind why consumers reject specific brands (Lee & al., 2009). Despite the importance of the subject, brand avoidance remains relatively unexplored. Of course consumers often choose a certain brand because of the positive benefits it represents. But in order to completely understand consumer behavior, also the reasons behind the not-buying decisions should be untangled. By understanding what motives lay behind brand avoidance companies can make their brands stronger. As Lee &. al., (2009) put it: “knowing what consumers do not want is just as valuable as knowing what they want”.
In consumer behavior research the both ends of the age spectrum, namely the older and the younger customers, are often ignored. That is why this paper takes young consumers’ perspective when studying brand avoidance. 
1.2.   Purpose of the study and limitations
The purpose of this study is to understand the young consumers’ motives behind brand avoidance. This paper aims to fulfill this purpose by answering the following research question:
Why do young people avoid certain brands?
Thus, this paper will try to find out why young people avoid, dislike or even hate certain brands while loving some other brands. 
Brand avoidance refers only to the active rejection of a brand, not the situations where consumers have no choice. Therefore, this study does not look at the incidents where consumers do not choose certain brands because they are not available or too expensive. (Lee et. al., 2009)
The study will be limited to consumers’ thoughts and opinions related to their brand avoidance. Thus, this paper do not study the managerial point of view, neither does the study focus on how companies can limit consumers’ brand avoidance, but it is an interesting subject for further research. Naturally, what limits brand avoidance is very important topic for getting a holistic view of the brand management and understanding concerning how to prevent brand avoidance, but the limitation is done due to the exploratory nature of the study in a field where no previous research exists. Therefore this study mainly focuses on which motives for brand avoidance are relevant in young consumers’ world, as well as if there are any new findings emerging from the data.
This study is not focusing on a certain branch or specific products. Because it is such a broad topic, I want to study thoughts and opinions around brand avoidance on a general level.
1.3.  The structure of the paper
The paper is organized into five sections. First, in the literature review, I will define the central concepts and provide an overview of brand avoidance literature. On the basis of the literature overview I will create a preliminary model of the reasons behind brand avoidance. Then, the second section presents the research data and methodology. In the analysis part I will try to find out if these dimensions of brand avoidance are relevant or irrelevant in young consumers’ context and if there are any new findings emerging from the data collection. The concluding section discusses managerial implications and presents some suggestions for further research.
2. Literature review
The structure of the literature review is illustrated in Figure 1. 
[Figure]
The literature review will begin with discussing brand avoidance in order to clarify the meaning and composition of the concept. Then the paper will take a closer look at young consumers and their consumption behavior. Finally, the literature review will study more precisely what kind of reasons and motives can be found behind young consumers’ brand avoidance. The empirical part of the study will then for its part try to clarify why younger consumers avoid certain brands.
2.1. Brand avoidance	
Anti-consumption refers to a situation where a consumer avoids or refuses consumption for certain reasons (Soon-Wha, 2011). Brand avoidance represents one particular form of anti-consumption, namely “the incidents in which consumers deliberately choose to reject a brand”.  Brand avoidance refers only to the active rejection of a brand, not the situations where consumers have no choice. Therefore, this study does not look at the incidents where consumers do not choose certain brands because they are not available or too expensive. (Lee et. al., 2009)
Lee et al. divide brand avoidance into three classes, namely experiential, identity and moral brand avoidance. Experiential brand avoidance arises because consumption experiences had led to unmet expectations. Identity avoidance develops when the brand image is not symbolically consistent with the identity of the individual. Moral avoidance arises when the consumer's ideological beliefs are not convergent with brand values or associations. (Lee et. al., 2009)
3. Method
The aim of this chapter is to introduce the research process as well as justify the chosen method that is used to achieve the purpose of the study.
3.1. The research method
This report aims to study the young consumers’ motives behind brand avoidance. The research method is qualitative as the intention is to find out what consumers think and feel about particular things, and get as extensive picture of the consumers’ motives as possible. This kind information can’t be measured or observed. Qualitative methods give a deeper understanding of the problem that is studied (Holme & Solvang, 1991:26). Because brand avoidance is a complex and relatively new topic it calls for new insights. Therefore qualitative method seems reasonable for this study. The aim of this study is not to create a representative sample, but only to collect new insights. 
3.2. Sample and respondents
The respondents are from 14 to 19 years old. Convenience sample.
3.3.  Data collection
The data for the research is collected through four (?) semi-structured interviews of the consumers. This method made it possible to ask further questions in order to understand the underlying arguments behind motives and attitudes.
3.4.  Interview guide
This chapter will present the interview guide.
3.5. Reliability and validity of the conducted study
This chapter will evaluate the reliability and validity of the conducted study
3.6. Data analysis
In order to clarify why young consumers avoid certain brands, the data will be analyzed on the basis of the preliminary model. The answers of the respondents will be compared in order to find out if a certain dimension of brand avoidance is regarded as central in young consumers’ context. After the roles of the dimensions have been evaluated, they will be divided into central elements, indifferent elements and new findings. Aim of this categorizing is to discover the factors that are congruent with the literature, the factors that are less important in this context, and if there are any new central elements emerging from the data, that has not been discovered in previous research.
[Figure]
Figure 4 depicts the analysis process of the results, that is to say categorizing of the data according to those dimensions that where found in literature review and further according to their importance for young consumers. The aim is to sketch a common view of the importance of each factor. Possible new factors can emerge if the interviewees emphasize some new factors that have not been taken up in the previous literature.
4. Results
This chapter will present the results of the empirical study. After each dimension of brand avoidance I will present the most central results from the interviews. 
5. Discussion
This chapter will present the eventual outcome of the results: a model of the different dimensions of brand avoidance from young consumers’ perspective.
6. Conclusions
In the concluding chapter, I will repeat the most central message of my study and offer some suggestions for future research.





