CAN PRIVATE BLOGGERS HELP COMPANIES SPREAD WORD OF MOUTH?
Introduction
“Virtual co-creation by customer means information sharing with multiple entities in a distributed innovation environment. Co-creation is based on cooperation of people with different IT capabilities” (Füller et al., 2010:96) 
During the last ten years blogs have become popular forums, where bloggers express themselves freely, interact with other Internet users and enjoy themselves. Blogs are also tools, which can be used at low cost (or for free) in order to improve a company’s communication strategy and as a means for doing business. (Singh & Singh, 2008). Equally, a blog can develop into a business in itself, run by a private person. Blogs can also be used for building goodwill and educating a company’s customers. The authors praise the new technology that enables people to blog and they also conclude that blogs provide a new way of targeted communication (Singh & Singh, 2008). Hence, the scholars predict that niche marketing and target groups will dominate the future in a saturated information environment. Companies still target the biggest blogs with the highest visitor numbers, which will not necessarily be the best strategy in the future. Especially online marketing is becoming more niche-oriented, where the focus is directed at certain segments. (Janson, 2008)
Furthermore, it is clear that bloggers have power. In a survey conducted by a Swedish PR company, Mahir, it was reported that 58 percent of the respondents, who had bought a product online, read about it in a blog. It was also stated that companies often completely run out of certain products when they are featured in blogs, which again points at the tremendous power of bloggers. (Janson, 2008) 
Companies aim at co-operating with private bloggers, in order to create word-of-mouth in the blogosphere. The creation of mutual benefits or a meaningful synergy is essential for continuing a relationship and for building communities (Rowley, 2004) A dialogue is created out of interactivity and engagement, as well as from the ability to see the world from different angles. (Prahalad & Ramaswamy, 2004 in Desai, 2009) In a social media context the dialogue is essential for different parties to interact and understand each other. (Desai, 2009) A dialogue is also created out of engagement, as well as from the ability to see the world from different angles. (Prahalad & Ramaswamy, 2004 in Desai, 2009)
Companies need to build relationships with private bloggers, who are key players in the blogosphere. Finne & Grönroos reflect on relationship communication and conclude that: 
“…/…any type of marketing communication that influences the receiver’s long-term commitment to the sender by facilitating meaning creation through integration with the receiver’s time and situational context. The time context refers to the receiver’s perception of the history and envisioned future of his/her relationship with the sender. The situational context refers to other elements internal or external to the receiver.” (Finne & Grönroos, 2009:180-181) 
Furthermore, some scholars state that a company’s value is largely determined by the quality of the networks it is engaged in. (Woerkum & Aarts, 2007) There are three different aspects of digital marketing communications that a company should work on; creating presence, creating relationships and creating mutual benefits (Rowley, 2004) To that, fostering relationships is also concerned with the firm’s reputation. (Fombrun et al., 2000 in Woerkum & Aarts, 2007) The level of corporate communication effectiveness will also be reflected in the firm’s perceived image. (Malmelin, 2007) Mangold et al. (2009) point out that it is impossible for managers to control the (online) consumer-to-consumer conversations. However, it is possible to build relationships with key persons, who actively spread information that is – in a blog context – read and followed by thousands of people a day.
“New media facilitate social marketers and customers to co-create value; however, it is not essential. Without the use of new media, many social marketers are reciprocating partners and empower, encourage, and support people to make them reciprocating partners. For being an active relationship partner, the most important task for a social marketer is to nourish reciprocity in the relationships.” (Desai, 2009:117)
Next, the core theory of this study is presented. 
The Coproduction Model
In this chapter the aim is to show how word-of-mouth theory has evolved over time and what the situation is like today.
Kozinets et al. (2010) have constructed their own theory, using three different models. The first one shows the earliest and today fairly outdated view on WOM where information about brands, products and marketing messages flow between two customers in one direction. The marketer influences consumers only through different Marketing-Mix Elements and does not attempt to steer, monitor or influence the consumer in any way. (Arndt, 1967, Engel, Kegerreis & Blackwell 1969, Gatignon & Robertson, 1986 in Kozinets et al., 2010) This model is based on the fact that WOM will occur naturally when the marketer does his part of the job – i.e. developing new products and creating appropriate marketing campaigns. (Bass, 1969, Whyte, 1954 in Kozinets et el. 2010) The second model proposed by Kozinets et al. refers to the power of opinion leaders. In this model the opinion leader influences several consumers through his or her experience, however, the communication still flows one way only. Hence, WOM theory evolves from the idea of a salesman trying to get rid of sales items to a friend recommending a product to another without any intentions or pre-determined strategies. (Dichter 1966 in Kozinets et al. 2010) This can directly be linked to the role of a private blogger. The marketer reaches the consumer through the Marketing Mix Elements and actively seeks to influence the opinion leader indirectly through advertisements and promotions. However, this model is not applicable anymore, as the idea community is missing, where consumers interact with each other, as well as with the marketer and the blogger.
In the third model, The Network Coproduction Model, the authors recognize and integrate the Internet as an important factor in the communication between the consumer and the marketer. This model represents the authors’ view on where we are today.
[Figure]
Because of the World Wide Web companies can easily measure and monitor who their clients are (e.g. in a blog) and know which channels their marketing messages pass through. This can be done in many ways, and one good way is tracking the links and tags that 86% of bloggers use. (Horowitz, 2010) Also, as shown before, marketing practices have become relationship oriented (Vargo & Lusch, 2004 in Kozinets et al., 2010), which in turn refers to the importance of networks and communities. In The Network Coproduction Model consumers interact with each other within groups, but also with other consumers, co-creating value and meaning. Relationship ties can also be characterized as strong or weak. The assumption is based on the following linkages: person A and person B’s relationship is strong, as well as person B’s and person C’s bond. Based on these strong linkages, the theory assumes that the tie between person A and C must also be strong (Granovetter, 1973 in Godes & Mayzlin, 2004)– as they belong to a community with powerful member relationships. To that, community members are likely to learn from each other through interaction when they share experiences. (Godes & Mayzlin, 2004) That is why blogs serve as great mediums for co-creation and information sharing. 
These customer-to-customer touch points should be thoroughly examined, as they provide valuable information for companies. (Desai, 2009)  Furthermore, there are two key elements to understand. First, companies use different means to measure and target the consumers and/or the opinion leaders. Second, the marketing messages and meanings flow in two ways with a clear direction within a consumer network. (Kozinets et al., 2010) Valentini introduces the term “personalised network of influence”, which aims at explaining the interaction between PR practitioners and their influential public. It takes time and commitment to build up such networks. The author points out that the responsibility of building networks is not entirely corporate, but rather personal and up to every employee – where each and every one must form its own face-to-face bonds. Trust should be regarded as a highly valuable organizational asset (Valentini, 2010) and Desai highlights its importance in social marketing – where the parties are seldom present at the same location and where the client has to rely on what he or she is promised (about a product or a service). (Desai, 2009) Also, trust is important within the organization, as employees seem to be more willing to pass information upwards when they are encouraged to do so. (Mohr & Nevin, 1990)
The WOM network is constantly expanding, changing and becoming more efficient, which in turn sheds light on the fact that marketers should be aware of this radical development. (Scott, 2009) Kozinets et al. note that their new WOM model contributes to marketers’ awareness of the multidimensionality of consumer networks and the communication within them. However, it does not necessarily mean that marketers know how to use the information they have and to grasp the power of exchanged information between consumers. 
Some marketers are reluctant to this idea of direct access, where information is available for anyone, anytime and where bloggers are even considered experts in their field, without any ‘real’ experience or an academic background. Others, such as entrepreneurs and nonprofit executives, embrace the seemingly unlimited ways of reaching buyers and customers (Scott, 2009). 
In the next chapter the method for this study is presented.
Method
This study is based on a qualitative research method, which is effective because it has the “…/…ability to get under the surface in order to understand people’s perceptions and experience.” (Silverman, 2006:6) Seven interviews were conducted over a period of two weeks at the head quarters of the representatives’ offices. The respondents are presented below:
Alex Fager, Head of Programming at Yleisradio
Antti Pasila, CEO and Partner at Kiosked, a Finnish software vendor
Tobias Wacker, Strategist at advertising agency Hasan & Partners
Jussi-Pekka Erkkola, Digital Marketing Manager at Nokia
Christina Forsgård, Senior Consultant and Partner at Netprofile
Valpuri Mäkinen, PR Professional at Canon
Teija Tamminen-Saremaa, Corporate and Marketing Communication Manager at Canon
Jonathan Heino, Nordic Brand Manager at Unilever
The companies were chosen from different sectors, as bloggers are not limited to a certain field. The interviews were transcribed and the citations analyzed in the following way: The process of coding can be divided into three groups – open coding, axial coding and selective coding. In open coding the collected data will be placed into conceptual units, followed by labels. This is done, as the researcher’s aim is to understand the meaning of the content. When the open coding is done, the next step is to recognize the relationship between the categories of data, also referred to as axial coding. These in turn are organized according to hierarchy and thus, subcategories emerge. Axial coding is used for explaining a phenomenon and for looking into why something is happening and how it evolves. Selective coding is done over a longer period of time, when the core or main category is identified. Then, the remaining categories are linked to the principal category, the relationships are studied and finally grounded theory has been formulated. (Saunders et al., 2007) 
Material
The respondents point out how time consuming and difficult it is to find the right private bloggers to co-operate with. Corporate representatives need to screen the blogs and follow them for a long period of time, in order to get a thorough understanding of who the person is behind the produced content. 
“It requires quite a lot of time to find the right blog. You have to read it for some time and skim through it and form a picture of that person, like who is this and what could we, for the readers, what can we offer, what kind of commenting and stories are there. People [private bloggers] do get in contact with us too, through the web site or then they’ve heard it from someone else. They apparently have good internal relations.” (Mäkinen, Canon, 17.02.2011) 
Private bloggers actively communicate with each other, and Mäkinen sheds light on the networks that are continuously formed in the blogosphere. Word-of-mouth flows actively between different parties and reach finally reach the blog readers.
”Quite a lot is about forming a relationship with the [blog] reader…/…we usually call it feeling, information and entertainment. Which means that one should awaken some feeling, contribute with some kind of information and be entertaining. And in that way form a contact to the audience that makes it familiar with you. And if it becomes familiar with you, then it [the audience] might feel that it knows you in a whole new way and in that case it wishes to come back to what you write and do and speak about. That is our primary strategy for addressing things.” (Fager, Yle X3M, 07.02.2011)
Hence, Fager stresses the importance of creating good content, which the blog readers and private bloggers may have an interest in and may feel like sharing with other community members. 
Furthermore, companies work with private bloggers with the intention of creating some sort of marketing and spreading certain content. To that, Wacker speaks about how Hasan & Partners engages itself, by means of sparking interaction in the blogosphere. 
“For us [Hasan&Partners] what is extremely crucial is engagement…/…For me WOM works in a way that we provide communication, which is culturally interesting for people so that they would like to share it. So we have to go away from making advertising, which is talking about the product, going towards communication…/…So we hope that people are willing to do the WOM thing. Which is probably today more important in the web, than just telling verbally. Because it spreads like a hundred times faster and immediately wider.” (Wacker, Hasan&Partners, 11.02.2011)
Some companies are less (or not at all) engaged in the creation of WOM and they might learn the hard way, as personal recommendations are crucial online and in real life. Nevertheless, WOM can be taken into consideration in a company’s communication strategy, and this might have an impact on the consumers. 
“WOM online is sort of like ‘you don’t pay attention before it’s too late’. You don’t get what’s going on before it’s in your face.” (Heino, Unilever, 18.02.2011)
Then it is a matter about how much impact private bloggers in fact have over other consumers. They certainly influence their loyal blog readers, who check in once or several times a day. But the rest most likely remain untouched. 
“Although every blogger would write something negative about Flora [dairy brand] I still don’t believe that we would lose much in sales. Because it’s only a certain part of the consumers who go in and check. But if it would continue for a while, then the sales drop would slowly be visible.” (Heino, Unilever, 18.02.2011)
Furthermore, there are some private bloggers, who become public figures and actively join different discussions also in other types of media than just blogs. 
“Outi [Vainionkulma-Immonen, employee at Netprofile] has in many cases been in the media commenting on topics she had written about in her blog, media phenomena. Discussion in the blog just continues.” (Forsgård, 15.02.2011)
Companies’ efforts to co-operate with private bloggers are grounded in the hope of getting visibility in blogs, where specific target groups can be reached in an effective way. There is hardly any recipe for how to communicate with private bloggers, so companies might as well try their luck. Often, the outcome can be very positive.
“Many companies would like to be seen in private blogs…/…If your blog is about German schlager from the 1970s and you have 500 readers, then you have a product. Because they would probably have 95% of the customers interested in a product that would fit in there. But it might be that only 200 of those 500 blog readers read the same article published in Helsingin Sanomat [a Finnish news paper].” (Pasila, Kiosked, 10.02.2011) 
Analysis
According to the study, it is evident that companies are aware of the power of private bloggers and their ability to influence consumers. The way that marketers work today is very different from ten years ago, when the Internet was still quite a new tool. Today social media and blogs are widely used for different purposes and at a very low cost. This offers companies great opportunities to reach blog readers and specific target groups, who actively communicate with each other and spread information within their communities. Private bloggers are considered highly trustworthy, as they express their opinions in their own forum. Therefore, they are not directly paid to write in a certain way and they can freely choose their topics. Therefore, it is even more important for companies to create really good content and products, in order to spark Internet users’ interest. In contrast, bad content might also be popular online, but the question is how that affects a company’s image. 
Furthermore, it is evident that companies need to build relationships with private bloggers, who are individuals and like to be treated as such. There is hardly any point in treating all private bloggers equally, as they do not share interests or background. To that, the creating of WOM is largely linked to the blog readers, who often stay true to their favorite private bloggers, which explains why it is so important for companies to relate to them. 
Conclusion
In the light of this study it is clear that companies should co-operate with private bloggers, in order to create word-of-mouth. It has widely been agreed that WOM is the most effective way to reach out to consumers, often much more effective than any other type of marketing. Therefore, it might be a good idea for companies to formulate strategies, which aim at fostering this idea and finding new ways of communicating certain information to different parties. 
The financial crisis has also forced companies to lower their costs and to cut down their resources. Therefore, the importance of co-operation with private bloggers becomes more important, due to the cost-effective and diverse nature of the marketing. Word-of-mouth is such a simple concept, but yet so challenging to create for the right object, at the right time. 
