Introduction 

Today’s business organization is a competitive environment where only the strongest survive. This statement applies especially to the leaders, who are accountable for how the organization performs Therefore, the question: “What makes a good leader?” is commonly asked in nearly all of the organizations regardless of the purpose the organization serves. Although there is a lot of research available on the subject, no clear explanation of what makes an effective leader has emerged, which would apply to all organizations. 
A commonly used practice in leadership research is to analyze successful organizations and particularly their leaders’ leadership methods. One of the most cited leadership researcher is Daniel Goleman, an American psychologist and science journalist, who studied some 200 large global companies in order to distinguish the qualities that are associated with effective leadership. Goleman came up with an insight that qualities such as a high IQ, determination, toughness, and vision that are traditionally linked with successful leadership are insufficient without so called soft qualities of leadership. According to Goleman, the soft qualities include self-awareness, self-regulation, motivation, empathy, and social skills.   Goleman published his findings in a book called Emotional Intelligence (EI) in 1995.

One of the most interesting and consequently one of the most analyzed organizations is Apple.  The research has focused on Apple’s previous chief executive officer, Steve Jobs, who passed away in October 2011. Jobs is often considered as one of the best leaders of this century, and as a result, his leadership skills have been under close scrutiny.  What is fascinating is that Steve Jobs cofounded Apple in his parents’ garage in 1976, was expelled in 1985, but returned in 1997 to rescue Apple from near bankruptcy. On the day Jobs passed away, Apple was the world’s most valuable brand and the company was ranked by several sources as the number one company in the world [Fortune Magazine’s List of World’s Most Admired Companies 2011, Millward Brown's Brandz 100 ranking, 2011]. The positive correlation between Jobs presence as the CEO of Apple and Apple’s astonishing success as a company leads us naturally to the question on how Jobs managed to do this and what made him such a successful leader? This question is even more interesting because Jobs’ reputation as a manager of people was not unusually high; on the contrary, he was perceived as being excessively demanding or sometimes even tyrannical. Some even labeled Apple as one of the worst-managed companies in the industry. 
Evidently, Goleman’s study regarding the necessary soft leadership qualities does not seem to fully apply to Steve Jobs’s success as a leader. Jobs obviously did not possess all of the soft qualities Goleman suggested, but still, Jobs managed to lead Apple from near destruction to the top. What were the soft qualities that Jobs possessed, what were lacking, and how this affected the Apple’s organization and eventually the people who worked for the company? 
The paper is structured as follows. The first section describes the motivation and the objective of this study, including the research questions. The second part describes the theory of Emotional Intelligence and tries to identify how it applied to Steve Jobs leadership style if at all. The third section summarizes the findings. 
Emotional Intelligence
In this chapter, I will explain the theory of emotional intelligence (not ready  yet). In the following chapter I will describe Steve Jobs life story. Then I will analyze what kind of impact Job’s personal life had on his way of leading people, and how emotional intelligence was reflected in Job’s leadership practices if at all. 
The last chapter summarizes my findings (if there are any ;)).
Emotional Intelligence (EI) is a relatively recent behavioral mode, first introduced by Daniel Goleman in 1995. Goleman argued that from the leadership skills perspective, the so called conventional intelligence, often measured by an intelligence quotient (IQ), is almost futile without the qualities of Emotional Intelligence. IQ ignores the essential behavioral elements of intelligence and consequently is not a suitable way measuring someone’s leadership skills. We have all met people who are extremely intelligent and yet are socially and inter-personally inept. Furthermore, we know that having a high IQ does not mean that you will have a successful career nor says that you will become an excellent leader.
Steve Jobs’ life
Steve Jobs passed away on October 5, 2011, at an age of 56. Although over a year has gone by, Jobs’ biography is one of the bestselling biographies available.  
Steve Jobs life started on February 24, 1955, in Wisconsin, United States, when he was born to two University of Wisconsin graduate students, Joanne Schieble and Abdulfattah Jandala. Joanne ended up giving Steve up for adoption because her father did not approve of her marrying a Syrian native. As a result, Steve was adopted by Clara and Paul Jobs, who lived in Silicon Valley California. From a very early age, Steve was interested in working with his father on electronics in their family garage. The family garage was a place where Steve learned basic technical skills, such as how to take apart and reconstruct electronic devices.
In the school environment, Jobs was clearly frustrated over formal schooling since he could not apply his intelligence and innovativeness to school work. Consequently, Jobs did not behave in the approved manner and he was considered as a prankster among the teachers. However, he did so well on examinations that the school executives suggested him to skip straight ahead to high school. Nevertheless, Paul and Clara declined this proposal. 
After finishing elementary school on regular time, Jobs enrolled at Homestead High school in 1971. During his high school years, Jobs met Steve Wozniak, a student from University of Michigan, who became Jobs’ close friend and later a co-founder of Apple Computer. After high school, Jobs enrolled at Reed College in Portland, Oregon. He quit the college soon after, and enrolled at creative classes for some 18 months. Next Jobs got a job from a video game producer, Atari. Jobs spent only a few months working for the company, since he felt like he should rather seek for spiritual enlightenment than working from nine to five.  Therefore, he flew over to India with his friend, Daniel Kottke, with whom he had became friends with at Reed College. Steve and Daniel spent the next two years seeking inner rest and getting away from materialism. The experience changed the thinking of Jobs, as he returned back to the United States as a Buddhist with a shaved head.
 After moving back to his home country, Jobs partnered up with Steve Wozniak who he had became friends with during the high school years. In 1976, the two Steves established a computer company in Job’s parents’ garage, for which they gave a name Apple Computer.  Apple Computer’s business idea was to make affordable personal computers for everyday consumers. Wozniak was in charge of technical of whereas Jobs was responsible for marketing of Apple Computers. Job approach to marketing of computers was somewhat revolutionary as he marketed the computer as a piece of a counter culture lifestyle: romantic, youthful, and creative.
In 1980, Apple Computer’s sales had reached 140 million dollar and during the same year Apple went public through an initial public offering in which the market value of the company climbed to 1.2 billion USD. Regardless of a rosy start, Apple’s history includes some setbacks. One of the major difficulties was the success of Apple Computer’s rival, IBM, and their personal computer (PC), which suddenly outperformed Apple’s Machintosh. Jobs did not want to make Machintosh compatible with IBM’s PC which caused a loss of sales. Difficulties with the computer sales and due to his strong personal views how Apple should move forward, Jobs was fired in 1985. Right after losing his CEO post at Apple, Jobs launched a new software company called NeXT and acquired an animation company from George Lucas. The animation company, which later was named as Pixar Animation Studios, became extremely successful. However, NeXT Incorporation struggled to sell operating systems to customers in the country.

The relationship between Apple Computer and Steve Jobs continued in 1997 when Apple acquired the NeXT for some 430 million USD. Shortly after, Steve Jobs returned to his post as Apple’s CEO. Jobs made some radical changes in the organization and revitalized the company’s product offering and brand. For instance, Jobs replaced the management team, changed the employee stock option plans, and created the iMac brand. Furthermore, he did not want to receive more than a dollar as an annual salary for his work to demonstrate his personal dedication for the company.

Jobs underlined the importance of creating pioneering product lines and branding them superiorly. Apple was again back on the track with Job’s initial vision of creating counter cultural life style products. Between 2000 and 2010, Apple introduced many ground-breaking products such as the Macbook Air, iPod, iPhone, and iPad which all have had a huge impact on the evolution of modern technology. Regardless of the cancer tumor discovered in 2003, Jobs continued to work for Apple until the very last day of his life. During his leadership Apple had sold over 320 million iPods, 135 million iPhones, 35 million iPads, and the value of Apple’s stock had risen from 10 to some 400 USD. 
In summary, it is fair to say that Jobs’ life was everything but predictable as he rather followed his own instinct than pleased others. This characteristic can also be easily noticed in his way of leading Apple. Jobs was a visionary and creative genius, who left behind a company that only he could have built. 
Steve Jobs as a leader

Steve Jobs’ leadership practices have been under close scrutiny due to Apple’s ability to attract the best employees in the industry, to continuously develop first-class products, and to create a customer base, which is almost religiously loyal to the company brand. Many people say that Apple’s success has been a result of Steve Job’s ability to steer the company strictly towards his own vision. Jobs knew what he wanted and he also knew what was needed to get there.  Under Job’s leadership, Apple turned Job’s innovative ideas into spectacular products at a pace that the industry rivals could only hope for. Apple’s success, however, did not come without a price. Job’s was perceived as a terrible manager of people. Many employees at Apple, NeXT, and Pixar studios have described Steve as a control freak who was unwilling to give credit where it was due. Some have even stated that he was tyrannical and lacking empathy. 
It is somewhat surprising that a man who was described as such a cold personality could lead Apple to such success.  Yet, Jobs had something that many other managers did not have. He was confident enough to take risky leaps, and charismatic enough to draw the most talented employees in the pursuit of his vision. He was a perfectionist and he attracted like-minded people who were never fully satisfied with their work. Morover, despite of his arrogance, he was highly respected by Apple’s employees, peers and the business community in general (Godell, 1996).  Jobs was able to create a working atmosphere where the employees became motivated simply by the pride they got from meeting the challenges set by their CEO.  
In a nutshell, many qualities Jobs possessed would not be characterized as the ones of a good manager of people. Yet, his charisma, self-confidence, passion, and vision for work overshadowed all his negative characteristics.  

EI vs. Steve Jobs leadership methods analysis
Findings / Summary
Sources


