Degrowth:­ Can It Be Sold To The Big Crowds?


1 Introduction
Recent years have uncovered a deepening interest for economic and social downshifting, as well as
degrowth. It is becoming more popular to jump of the treadmill of achievement and focus to a bigger
extent on well-being and contentment. While downshifters are in favor of finding a less stressful
work-life balance and emphasize personal relations, degrowth- advocators strongly object the never-
ending mania for economic growth. They acknowledge that resources are limited and want to
decrease consumption and production ­ therefore they want to construct an alternative economic
system for modern societies that does not rely on growth in itself. (Schneider, Kallis, & Martinez-Alier,
2010)


Researchers who are in favor of degrowth, like Kallis (2011), find the transition to a degrowth ­based
economic system feasible. However, the problem appears to be that the term degrowth is lacking a
realistic definition and convincing economic theory that would capture the attention of a larger
crowd. Today, it seems that the concept of degrowth is rather confusing and might not be
approached seriously nor deemed credible by policy-makers, thereby not being able to attract many
additional supporters than those who've already adopted it (Bergh, 2011). Given this background, my
paper wants to examine more thoroughly the scientific reliability of degrowth. A valid theory that
raises more thoughts than questions appears to be missing within degrowth studies. The question is
thus, whether degrowth will gain new terrain with the existing loose definition. After reading studies
on degrowth it remains unclear when additional economic growth stops adding well-being? How can
the public be convinced that it should give up the quest for financial gains and economic success? In
this paper I intend to discuss questions that impact the credibility of degrowth and study the existing
literature on degrowth from a critical perspective. With this study, I hope to suggest some measures
that could improve the future prospects of degrowth.

1.1 Outline
The outline of the paper will be structured as follows. Chapter 2 presents some background to the
field of study of my paper, while chapter 3 focuses on earlier research conducted in the field of
degrowth. In chapter 4 I assess and discuss the loopholes within current research of the degrowth
movement and some suggestions for how to improve the relevance and credibility of existing
literature. Chapter 4 is followed by a conclusion in chapter 5 where I summarize my main findings.

2 Background
"Consumption today consists of people spending money they don't own, to buy things they don't
need, to impress people they don't like." (Hamilton, Money, Careers and Contentment, 2003)


The degrowth movement has evolved over time, from dealing with the consequences of industrial
production to objecting the past years' obsession with financial profits. Degrowth emphasizes
sustainability by voluntary downsizing economic activities ­ production and consumption - and the
recognition of limited resources. Furthermore, the core beliefs include the possibility to reach a state
of welfare without depending on economic growth. (Schneider, Kallis, & Martinez-Alier, 2010) The
degrowth-proponents accept the notion that economic growth can't change the fact that resources
are finite nor that humanity and our globe will eventually vanish (Kallis, 2011). Instead of surrounding
around economic growth, materialism and capitalism, degrowth acknowledges human well-being as
well as social equality. (Schneider, Kallis, & Martinez-Alier, 2010)



3 Previous Research
Pioneers like Daly and Georgescu-Roegen, as well as Meadows et al. have engaged in developing
studies that focus on the sustainability and interaction of social, environmental and economic
aspects. (Daly, 1996); (Georgescu-Roegen, 1971); (Meadows, Meadows, Randers, & Behrens III, 1972).
The thorough research conducted by these innovators can be traced back to views presented by
Thomas Malthus in the 18th century, who acknowledged the limited resources and earth's carrying
capacity. (Petersen, 1999) Aligned with the philosophy of degrowth, these consumption-critical
thoughts have inspired several enthusiasts to study the potential within downscaling. Nevertheless,
the supply of relevant and contributing literature on degrowth is not vast. (Bergh, 2011)


Bergh has taken into consideration the criticism directed towards the degrowth- thought, and finds
the concept vague and ineffective, which is why he finds zero ­growth or indifference of growth
more realistic in today's society than negative growth (Bergh, 2011). He distinguishes between five
types of degrowth; GDP, consumption, radical, work-time and physical and discusses the problems
associated with each of these degrowth methods. He finds firstly, that GDP degrowth can't be, on a
general level, targeted to address specifically dirty industries, and secondly, that consumption
degrowth would require consumption limits on an individual that would be hard to specify. Thirdly,
Bergh sees a reduction of work-time as an ineffective means to achieve degrowth. Fourthly, he finds
that a radical degrowth approach would not take into consideration the characteristics of the human
being. Lastly, Bergh does not support the simplicity of physical degrowth (referring to a decrease in
the actual size of the economy), since finding a good indicator for this would imply problems. Bergh's
overall conclusion is that degrowth as a concept lacks in credibility and will not gain support among
policy-makers nor among the public. Rather, he promotes the indifference of growth. (Bergh, 2011)


A study with a more positive outlook on degrowth, opposing most of the views and statements
provided by Bergh (Bergh, 2011), is presented by Kallis. (Kallis, 2011) Bergh and Kallis agree on some
cures for reaching a less growth-obsessed society, like e.g. climate change pacts and decreases in
amount of time spent on work rather than leisure, yet they do not appear to share many other
opinions. Kallis supports a more radical, voluntary transition to a degrowth-economy based on
smaller production and fewer resources, rather than ending up in the same situation anyway without
any sustainable preparation. However, Kallis doesn't present any macroeconomic theories that could
enable this transition, but calls for more research on this matter. In fact, he admits that many
challenges lie ahead regarding degrowth -studies, particularly the link between environment and
economy needs to be studied more intensively. (Kallis, 2011)


Schneider et al on the other hand discuss the possibilities versus obstacles associated with degrowth.
While recognizing similar benefits in downscaling as their fellow colleagues, they also accept that the
degrowth philosophy is somewhat of an utopia and would require many reforms at practically every
level of the society, including every financial and social institution. The aim for a steady-state
economy would be reached only after these reforms have been accomplished. Schneider et al. call
for an acknowledgment of which future scenarios are feasible and which ones are simply unrealistic,
considering the modest progress made up to this date. (Schneider, Kallis, & Martinez-Alier, 2010)


Kerschner (2010) goes deeper into the subject of steady-state studies. He explores whether using
steady-state economy (SSE) tools to assess degrowth could be useful for approximation of the global
effects of degrowth. He finds that there is a significant lack of concrete policies in degrowth -
literature, particularly from a demographic point of view, and this lack could be complemented by
SSE ­related theories. Kerschner claims that SSE and degrowth complement each other: by following
the degrowth philosophy in the North, the South would have some space to grow, and the global
economy could achieve a steady state. (Kerschner, 2010)


This is not, however, the opinion of Latouche, who finds that developing countries should not engage
in growth economics and instead adopt degrowth strategies as well, in order to decrease their
dependence on the North. Global growth dependency leads to further dependencies that would be
non-existent without the growth mania in the first place. (Latouche, 2004) Also Hamilton brings up,
firstly, the domination of economic growth as the cause for many of our society's problems, and
secondly, the inability to accept that there might exist other means to reach well-being. (Hamilton,
2003) He proposes alternative policies and power structures to adopt in a post-economic growth ­
society. Griethuysen further discusses the underlying reasons for our society's obsession with growth.
He finds that there prevails a lock-in effect, created by the capitalism mentality of western countries.
His conclusion is that the road to a common alternative economic thinking is long. (Griethuysen,
2009) Certainly, Griethuysen is not the only one stating this opinion, nevertheless, not being able to
serve a concrete replacing or complementing economic theory to the prevailing growth theories.
Latouche, like many other researchers in favor of degrowth, admits that there is a lack of calculation
theories on degrowth. (Latouche, 2004)



4 Analysis & discussion of the problems associated with degrowth
Below I discuss some of the economic problems associated with the currently existing research
conducted on degrowth. The literature reveals several gaps that should be completed in order to give
degrowth a more precise meaning and a possibility to reach out to a larger support group.

4.1 Moral hazard and moral deficit
One of the economic problems that arise from a transition to degrowth is the problem of information
asymmetry. This particular aspect should receive more attention than the current material provides.
Mostly present is the principal-agent problem, where the principal wishes that the agent acts in a
specified way on the behalf of the principal, but the principal can't be sure that this occurs. In other
words, there is a problem of moral hazard, that is, a form of postcontractual opportunism, where one
part might act according to his/her own interest at the expense of the counterpart. (Milgrom &
Roberts, 1992) If the concept of degrowth would be applied on a global scale, appropriate conduct of
people and a common moral would be needed. This is also recognized by Kerschner, who states that
the pursuit of degrowth is an overly optimistic idea without "moral growth" of people as a whole.
Applied to the principal-agent relationship, the problem would be as follows. The society would be
the principal and require that the agents, i.e. the people, would live according to guidelines that
could enable a state of degrowth. But individuals would most likely have incentives to deviate from
these rules, in order to achieve an increased personal gain. Degrowth -policies would require that
people give up the pursuit of maximal wealth, which can surely be considered as a very optimistic
prerequisite. Therefore, the extent to which individuals would attempt to achieve the goals of
degrowth, could easily fall under the desired level of engagement.
Other moral hazards related to degrowth include free-riding, which could become a problem when
degrowth as a movement scales up. If people lack incentives to follow a sustainable lifestyle in
accordance to degrowth, they might free-ride on others' actions instead of taking own initiatives.

4.2 Quantification problem
Kerschner points out that many existing economic theories are irrational, and thus the degrowth-
theories have the same possibilities to be formulated than any other economic theories. (Kerschner,
2010) In fact, economists rely on the human rationality, Homo economicus, as an underlying
assumption for many adopted policies and decisions. It is valid to identify that the transition from
theory to practice is not very functioning in economics in general. Developing a deeper theoretic
framework for unfeasible objectives is thus not a new idea, and should be pursued within degrowth-
and steady-state -studies. (Kerschner, 2010)


First of all, the calculus behind degrowth needs to be developed and made more advanced. If the
degrowth movement fails in offering a tangible alternative that individuals and societies in general
can adopt, it will not survive when applied to a global scale. Concerning the literature that this paper
has comprised, none of the studies have succeeded to serve an economic framework that could be
used in practice for the degrowth approximation. Considering, firstly, that many of the sources used
is very recent work, and secondly, the narrow supply of literature on the economics of degrowth in
general, it can be concluded that the economics of degrowth is relatively non-existent. The biggest
questions concern quantification: Cutting in current expenses is necessary in order to achieve a state
of degrowth, but to what extent should this downscaling occur? What is the contribution needed
from an individual or a company, for example, if we have to define this contribution in absolute
terms? How much degrowth is needed to produce a sufficient input for reaching the goals of
degrowth? The research should focus on answering these questions, since the public will
undoubtedly ask them.


Furthermore, one must accept the earlier mentioned notion that commitment to a lifestyle of
degrowth requires a moral obligation from the people. Considering that we live in a society where
maximization of profits is the mission of many individuals, companies and civilizations, moral growth
of humans can't be expected to occur over night. Thus, the economic framework of degrowth will
likely be deficient at least to some extent, should it ever be developed in the first place.
4.3 The definition problem
The degrowth-movement's Finnish web site defines the degrowth-economy in a somewhat vague
manner by stating that the movement does not desire to replace the current economic framework
and theories. The site underlines the importance of variety - degrowth societies can be organized in
various forms and exhibit different customs, depending on the local culture. (Mikä degrowth?)
However, this is the part where confusions might arise. The allowance for interpretations to vary
according to tradition is seen as a strength, nevertheless, it is also a weakness to lack a uniform
definition. Furthermore, some of the current claims concerning degrowth are contradicting. For
example, the reduction of production and consumption entails an underlying assumption that
progress in technology is negative for the society. However, through a more effective production,
technological advancement might enable us to produce larger quantities by using fewer resources.
Therefore, some of the goals set up by degrowth-proponents would be unattainable without
sufficient usage of current knowledge. To what extent should we depend on the procedures we
execute and live by in the current society of economic growth, and at which point should new
policies take over control? A more distinguished definition would lead to less informational
difficulties and thereby more proponents (and surely, more opponents as well). In future degrowth-
related research it would be important to focus on eliminating confusion.



5 Conclusion
This paper has discussed the literature on degrowth, a movement that wishes to construct an
alternative economic system for modern societies that does not rely on economic growth in itself.
The intention of this study has been to explore the gaps that currently exist in this literature. A
comprehensive research of the thoughts behind degrowth reveals that the aim of this movement
needs to be specified more clearly in order to catch the attention of new, more difficultly convinced,
crowds like policymakers and economists. The problems this paper identifies include the problem of
definition, the quantification issue as well as problems related to asymmetric information.
Furthermore, the nature of human beings can and will be a problematic issue for the execution of
degrowth. A moral growth in people would be demanded in order to be able to achieve desired
commitment. However, not all hope is lost, due to the increasing appreciation of a slower lifestyle,
which can be seen as a response to the consequences associated with the past years' financial crisis.
Therefore, if the term degrowth could be clarified and quantified more precisely, the public could
have a chance to adjust their lives accordingly, and thus we could have the opportunity to move
towards a future with a contracted economy.

