Money as a motivator

Introduction:
     Since motivation of employees is considered by leadership theories – beginning with assembly line production of the legendary Ford-T at Highland Park in Detroit- the impact of variation in salary became a central topic of different leadership approaches. In recent years, there have been many papers describing both positive and negative aspects of money on efficiency of labor and satisfaction among staff. It is generally accepted that money can be counted as a strong motivator, especially for lower and middle income levels - concerning higher salary grades disagreements can be observed. Compared to other impacts on motivation as work atmosphere, promotion possibilities or social status, money is in general credited as less efficient, in particular when a certain level of salary is reached. Publications of common motivation theories and leadership approaches pay attention to money as a motivator, but do not attach great importance to money as the most effective way of affecting followers in order to raise their outcome and satisfaction. (Northouse 2010, Rollinson 2008)
However, this view is challenged by papers showing that money is more important to employees than is admitted at first. (Rynes 2004) In spite of these observations, the common idea of money as a major but not as the most important factor remains unclear. Moreover, RSA Animate with their animated presentation “Drive: The surprising truth about what motivates us” clearly figures out that the same stimuli based on money reward causes different results between US and Indian participants. This supports the argument that differences in cultural values and norms tend to influence efficient adaptability of money as a motivator stronger than supposed in general. 
This paper evaluates the significance of payment for employees as well as for leaders by showing that money is - against common opinion - the most important motivator, independent from social status or financial situation. Furthermore, differences between individualistic and collectivistic societies according wage as a motivator should be illustrated. The rest of this paper will be organized in the following way: An overview on the-state-of-the-art motivation theories and leadership approaches should give basic background in order to highlight how money accts as a motivator within each of them. Based on these theories money as one of the most effective motivation approaches should be supported, including cultural aspects on the effect of money as motivator. 
What is motivation?
     Motivation can be summarized as an interaction of internal (intrinsic motivation) and external (extrinsic motivation) impacts or forces affecting an individual to focus on a specific issue or task leading to a satisfying accomplishment. In this connection internal impacts result from psychological values and personal achievements a person can gain directly from the given task or action. In contrast, external ones are provided from the surrounding organization based on one’s performance and criteria or norms defined outside of the individual. As examples satisfaction caused by an autonomous and successful managed task for intrinsic and salary, social security contributions or a company car representing extrinsic motivation can be mentioned. As both strongly depend on personal values and expectations motivational effect of internal and external factors strongly varies in orientation and amplitude among individuals. What significantly raises one’s performance might be totally different gathered by someone else. Furthermore, manner of getting motivated strongly differs between individuals, whereby a general strategy for general motivation hardly can be found. As the level of motivation varies both between individuals and within individuals at different times and jobs the target of motivating followers sadly has nothing to do with a one shot-deal gaining motivation among employees for a certain time period; it is more or less a process of providing permanent stimulation based on changing circumstances and individual expectations and needs. (Rollinson 2008:195-199)

How money is seen as a motivator.
     Based on the fundamental ideas of capitalism and free-market economy, leading to modern economic systems, efficiency of performance and continuous output improvement play a major role in today’s business live. According to Vroom performance (P) can be described as a function of work environment or equipment provided to fulfill a certain task (Environment E), the traits, skills, and (expertise-)knowledge of an individual (Ability A), and motivation to accomplish the task successfully (Motivation M). In brief: “P=f(E,A,M)” (Rollinson 2008:195). Whereas managers’ impact on first two mentioned factors by control of resources and installation of coaching programs is generally doubtless accepted, discussion connected to effects of different leadership approaches on follower motivation is still in progress.   Therefore the question “How employees can be motivated in an efficient way in order to cause or raise their inspiration for a given task resulting in better performance?” is an omnipresent and central topic in common leadership courses and state of the art management education programs. According to Frederic W Taylor (1911) who is considered as initiator of today’s motivation theories Rollinson described core values of scientific management as follows: “Most important of these is the assumption that the main (and perhaps only) thing that people seek to obtain from work is high pay.” (Rollinson 2008:201-202). The studies from Ronen (1986) clearly support this argument by pointing out importance of different functions of work. Even though the relative importance among analyzed countries alternates, the function of work as a source of income compared to source of interest, status, prestige or social satisfaction is highlighted. Money as a strong motivator is broadly accepted, but researches figured out that money is much more important to individuals than generally announced. These deviations result in the observed fact that HR managers often are evaluating money not adequately. (Rynes 2004)

How motivation theories support Money as an important motivator?
     Based on widely accepted motivation theories arguments pro money as a motivator will be provided. These theories of work motivation are generally divided into two groups: Content and Process theories. The earlier presented Content theories mainly concentrates on specific physiological and psychological needs and demands of individuals in order to point out what motivates and what has influence on one´s behavior in a direct way under different circumstances. Second, Process theory, focuses on the question “how” managers can change behavior of their followers to raise their motivation. (Rollinson 2008:202) Concerning content approach -what motives and needs human beings have- a short overview of the following three theories will be given: The Hierarchy of Needs Theory (Maslow 1954), the Two-factor Theory (Herzberg 1959), and the ERG Theory (Alderfer 1972).

Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs Theory:
     Maslow describes needs of every human individual by his “Pyramid of Needs” with five different levels; bottom-up: Physiological, Security, Affiliation, Esteem, and Self-actualization. Moreover, this theory argues that all these levels do not overlap or gear into each other and every individual is striving beginning with Physiological needs to climb the strict hierarchically ordered pyramid towards to above opened Self-actualization level. In addition, Maslow argues that motivation only can be induced by needs of the actual level, and ones this level is passed, no effect can be generated anymore. (This is also his most criticized conclusion) Physiological needs focus on basic requirements need to survive: Food, water, air and adequate heated shelter. Security needs are dealing with safety of one’s live and environment, absence of violence, pain and poorness, and predictability of one’s surrounding. Affiliation is based on human beings social needs of being loved, belonging to groups and societies, and having friends and family. The forth level Esteem covers the approval and support from family, friends or peers, self-respect as well as self-confidence, and respect respectively status among ambient society. Self-actualization including education, personal development, hobbies, and self-realization is counted as the most powerful motivation level pushing human beings to new theories, inventions, improvements and mental and cultural top-performing. (Rollinson 2008:202-204)
Due to the fact that especially in western industrialized countries living standard is strongly connected to available budget Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs Theory supplies numerous plausible perspicuous arguments for money as a motivator. Concerning basic physiological needs hardly any doubts against money occur as grocery and rent for flat are directly connected to successive expenses. Satisfaction of Security needs is strongly related to retirement arrangement and medical supply. Although both indeed are in several countries nationalized, private financial precaution is an important and costly issue for most individuals. Apart from the assumption that wealth allures friends Maslow’s Affiliation should be more or less independent from payment. In contrary Esteem describing self-confidence respect and status thoroughly can be linked to money and payment; especially in individualistic and materialistic orientated societies. Compared to the pre-stages Self-actualization supports above mentioned argument in the most significant way. Hobbies as traveling, regular vacation, interest in art and culture and further education definitely can be described as very expensive and therefore require an adequate salary.

Herzberg’s Two-factor Theory:
     Herzberg announced that the presence of two different groups of influence affecting on each individual is a necessarily required pre-condition to gain satisfaction among employees. The so called hygiene factors covering salary, relationship among peers, working conditions or company policies are necessary to avoid dissatisfaction and act more or less as negative null balance without having significant satisfying effects. Once all negative influences are removed by these hygiene factors amplitude of satisfaction is only a function of different motivators like achievement, career expectations or responsibility. Summing up, one of Herzberg’s core statements is that dissatisfaction cannot be counted as the counterpart of satisfaction and vice versa. Both are opposing no satisfaction/dissatisfaction but just in other directions. (Rollinson 2008:206-207)
Based on Herzberg’s work salary is classified as hygiene factor as well as motivator. According to the function as a hygiene factor providing dissatisfaction which can be caused by underpayment or (related to further down mentioned Equity Theory) by subjective impression of being under rewarded the importance of payment is generally accepted; concerning function as motivator views are drifting. While critics argue that money loses its motivational abilities with rising salary, refer advocators to a nonlinear motivational effect of money. (Rynes 2004) However, concerning Forbes the number of super-rich ones indeed is increasing; compared to average earners their number is still evanescent and negligible. Summing up, referring to the average employee money has a significant influence on satisfaction both as hygiene and as motivation factor.

Alderfer’s ERG Theory: 
     Similar to the idea of above mentioned Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs Theory Aldorfer based his theory of needs on three hierarchically ordered levels: Existence, Relatedness, and Growth (ERG). The lowest step (Existence) describing basic human needs is comparable to Maslow’s Physiological and Security needs whereas Relatedness needs including social needs and interaction within a society is strongly related to Affiliation and Esteem. The individualistic part of Maslow’s Esteem (self-respect and self-confidence) and Self-actualization result in Aldorfer’s highest level: Growth needs. In contrary to Maslow the ERG Theory argues that even though each human being bottom-up aspires to Growth needs, parallel existence of all levels is quite possible. Furthermore, Adler in addition pays attention to impacts of not fully satisfied levels of needs. (Rollinson 2008:204-205)
Linked to overlapping with Hierarchy of needs Aldorfe’s basic and top level (Existence and Growth) support money as a motivator in the same way as Maslow’s Physiological-, Security-, Esteem-, and Self-actualization needs do. Even though, as above already mentioned, Existence and Growth needs are strongly connected to norms and values created by social surrounding, average satisfaction is related to a certain level of wealth. 

Representing process theory -how to motivate- two subsequent theories will be described: The Expectancy Theory (Vroom 1964) and the Equity Theory (Adams 1965).

Vroom’s Expectancy Theory:
     Basic idea of this theory is that leaders can motivate their followers to accomplish a certain task by assuring or promising a positive reward as a result of good performance -similar to “positive reinforcement” (Rollinson 2008:177). Therefore, Vroom, to clarify that only a positive valued reward can lead to motivation, introduced Valence describing the individual’s preference of announced benefits which wildly can vary among followers. Furthermore, he argues that employees only put more effort to a given task, if they really expect that the promised benefits indeed will result from better performance. If any doubts concerning reliability occur, no increase in performance can be expected. (Rollinson 2008:229-230)
Not for all individuals money itself has the highest significance in their lives. Preferences range from expensive houses, high living standard, and education for kids to maximization of leisure time etc. leading to the fact that a benefit or reward highly valued by one employee not necessarily has the same effect on motivation to others. On the opposite, salary is in general valued indirectly by creating its stimulus acting as a “coupon” everyone can spend or invest individually. Moreover, in order to create expectancy among followers bonuses in general are associated to performance benchmarks requiring value-continuous reward systems where payment doubtless belongs to. Summing up, since satisfying both requirements (Valance and Expectancy) money is concerning to Vroom’s Theory indeed a powerful and widely accepted tool of motivation.

Adams’ Equity Theory:
     Human beings tend to compare themselves to people of their closer business environment and evaluate whether being treated adequate and equally. Therefore someone values beside her or his own input, education or expertise knowledge and achieved output (salary, bonuses, privileges…) also those from their closer surroundings working in the same field or holding a similar position. If the individual comes to the conclusion that their peers receive higher rewards in comparison to their input tension reducing motivation results. On the opposite, the feeling of being over rewarded raises employees’ motivation. Due to the fact, that individuals build up their conclusions mainly on subjective observations both deviations are not valued in the same way causing that decrease of motivation by feeling under rewarded (earning a certain amount less the average) is higher than the increase in motivation gained by being over rewarded (same amount over the average). These observations are similar to Perception and Attribution Theory pointing out that on the one hand human beings tend to explain failures and deviations of goals by external reason, but on the other hand gladly explain success by highlighting their own strengths. In brief, we mostly unwillingly accept that certain inequity is caused by our own behavior, when we feel ourselves under rewarded resulting in lower motivation. (Rollinson 2008:121,233-234)
Employees value their and the input of their peers based on subjective observation and their individual perception but compare their output by objective figures of pay tickets causing distortion in their conclusions. A clear compensation system helps to reduce subjectivity in order to point out salary deviations plausible and understandable for both sides: employees and management. Therefore, as above mentioned (see Adams’ Equity Theory), a money based reward system (as nowadays everywhere introduced) providing benchmarks and performance orientated feedback is widely accepted and highlights the role of salary.


Effects of cultural differences on money as a Motivator:
In this chapter I would like to point out cultural differences on how money is seen as a motivator based on Adler N. (Orgnizational behaviour, Chapter1, 2 & 5). Approximately 700 words

Conclusion
