Foreign Direct Investments and Emerging Markets in Academic literature
Introduction
Today internationalization relates in one way or another to the lives of most people. A MNC (Multinational Corporation) that opens, e.g. a new supermarket, will affect the people in its vicinity, whether those people choose to buy their groceries there or not. Internationalization is well covered in academic literature as well, and has been so since the 1960’s with the increase in FDIs (foreign direct investments). In itself internationalization is a broad topic and involves issues such as cultural tensions, choice of entry mode, financing, and strategy issues. Entry mode refers to how the company chooses to establish itself in a new market (make its own direct investment or enter the market with/through another company) (Dikova & van Witteloostuijn: 2007:1013). In this study these foreign investments are one of the main object of interest.
Another term that has been the object of wide discussion is emerging markets. It is speculated that these countries will have an important role in overcoming the global economic crisis. However, most of the literature concerning foreign investments is about multinational corporations (MNC) from the developed countries (Bhaumik &Gelb 2005:7). Recently also a number of studies have been made about developing country MNC’s FDIs (Meyer??). Also C.K. Prahalahad introduces, in his book “The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid: Eradicating Poverty Through Profits”, a new way of viewing the poor people in developing countries. This encouraged a few other researchers to take a closer look at the potential at ”the bottom of the pyramid”.
Although there is much talk about both foreign investments and the emerging markets, they have not received great coverage in the academic literature. Neither is there a specific framework for foreign investments and the emerging markets. 
Since FDIs and emerging markets are such central topics it is important to have an understanding of where the literature is right now. Literature reviews have been done, mainly focusing on one specific market, e.g. China. Therefore, in this study I will map the articles about FDIs to/from emerging markets (in general) from 2005 until now in five top academic journals (Academy of Management Journal, Academy of Management Review, Administrative Science Quarterly, Journal of International Business, and Strategic Management Journal).

Has the amount of literature about foreign investments and emerging markets increased during the previous 10 years?
Definitions
Foreign investments
Emerging markets (vs. developing countries)
Structure
Next literature from the studied time period will be presented. The structure of the study will be the following: First the relevant literature will be presented, to be followed by the methodology. Then the results will be presented and analyzed. Finally conclusions and implications will be discussed at the end.

Getting familiar with what has been written
A search in the database Web of Science for article written about “emerging markets” and “international*” comes up with approximately 900 hits. The most cited articles are mainly about economic factors which affect the business environment. The articles tend to have a focus on determining the stability of the market. Less has been written about investments to/from these markets from a strategic, organizational perspective.
[Next I will discuss what advancements have been made during 2001-2011, the time period that is studied. This part will also include articles that have been published in other journals besides the one studied]
Material
This study is based on the articles in the Journal of International Business Studies (JIBS). This journal was chosen because it is the highest ranked journal in the field of international business  (The Association of Business Schools, 2009). The articles in all issues from the years 2001 and 2011 will constitute the material of the study. The subjects of these articles have been studied to determine how much was written about foreign investments and emerging markets (“developing countries” was not counted as a synonym for the second term).
The material is made up of 54 articles from the year 2001 and 48 articles from the year 2011. These years were chosen for the study since neither one contains a special issue about the topics of interest.
There are certain limitations to the study pertaining to the material. Since the business world is international, the JIBS is not the only academic journal with articles about either foreign investments or emerging markets. Articles about the subjects have been published in many other journals as well. Second this study was limited to the content of subject words. Therefore at least one article about emerging markets was not reported because “emerging markets” was not mentioned in the subject field.
Results
The result is that from the entire sample only two articles contained the term “emerging markets” in their subject field (see EmergingMarket below). One of these articles was from the year 2001 and the other from 2011.
In the case of the term “foreign investment” the total amount of articles was 10. 
[Table]

In the case of articles containing both of the terms, only one was found. 
[Table]
Besides these previous results 26 articles mentioned a country in the subject field. These countries included also developed countries.
[no significant increase in the number of articles written about the topics]
Discussion

Conclusions


