Factors behind customer loyalty: A study in the Finnish food retail market

1 Introduction

In recent years, there has been wide interest in relationship marketing. The goods marketing logic has been moving more and more towards the service dominant logic. It is generally accepted that companies should focus on creating customer relationships in order to gain competitive advantage. To be profitable, companies should focus on the whole purchase process, both before the point of purchase and after the point of purchase. The dominant logic is moving away from the product itself, and focusing more on the process the product leads to. Relationships and services are becoming more and more important in value creation processes.
It has been claimed that the costs of maintaining relationships with existing customers are less expensive than the costs of getting new customers. (Hill & Alexander, 2006). Grönroos’ (2007) customer relationship lifecycle model focuses on three stages in order to get and maintain customer relationships. In the initial stage the customer might not have used the company before. Through different marketing actions, the company can persuade the customer to come to the company. This is the first step in creating a relationship. In the second step, the purchasing process, the companies must satisfy the customer in order to be chosen. The expectations must be met by the experience (Parasuraman et. al, 1985; Grönroos, 1988). Interactions are important and all of the employees should be seen as part-time marketers. (Gummesson, 1991) The companies should give what the customer wants and make future promises about the product/service. The last stage, the consumption process, is the most important stage from a relationship building point of view. It is in this stage loyalty and emotional bonds are built and will prevent the customer to leave the company. It is hence very important that the relationship should be managed also after the purchase. (e.g. Grönroos, 2007)
Although this theory makes a lot of sense, it does not give any real life data to show what kind of actions are actually taking place in the last stage of the relationship cycle. Furthermore, it is not evident that other unknown and maybe unrelated factors in other stages of the consumer relationship lifecycle could not affect the consumer relationships. Loyalty might not be built as the customer lifecycle model claims in all situations. Some theories claim that people are loyal to companies simply because it is easier than to switch to another company. Information seeking, analyzing, testing etc. take a lot of unnecessary time from the customers in these cases. The questions hence remains, what kind of actions are taking place in the consumption process? Are these actions actually affecting the loyalty? Can there be other factors affecting the consumer loyalty unrelated to company actions made in the consumption process?
1.1 Aim 

This paper will focus on customer loyalty and factors behind the loyalty. Because of limited resources, this paper will only focus on customer loyalty in the two biggest food retail chains in Finland. The research questions that will be answered is;
-Which factors can affect the consumer loyalty?
By answering this question, real life actions in the consumption process and possible other actions in other stages will be analyzed. It is important to realize that this paper only aim to find some factors that can affect the customer loyalty. Not all of the possible factors will be analyzed.
(The result showed many interesting actions, some of them not recognized before, as far as the author knows at the point of writing. 
1.2 Structure

This paper will start by a theory overview. After this the methodology, which consists of four in- depth interviews will be presented. The methodology will be followed by the results and the paper will end with a discussion section. 
2 Theory overview

1.3 Introduction

1.4 Relationship marketing and loyalty

1.5 Customer lifecycle

1.6 The Finnish food retail market

1.7 Summary and specifying the research problem

3 Methodology

The purpose of this paper is to research which factors can affect customer loyalty. In order to tackle this research problem qualitative research methods will be used.
3.1 Choice of method

 Since the wanted outcome of this research does not include any numeric data, qualitative research methods are more suitable than quantitative research methods for this study. (Saunders, Lewis & Thornhill, 2007) Out of different qualitative research method options in-depth interviews have been chosen as the most suitable and efficient method for this study. A semi-structured interview method will be used. One question might lead to another important question which will not be excluded only based on the interview guide. The questions are open ended in order to get as much information as possible from the respondent by their own words. The interviews will be recorded. The interview guide can be found as attachment 1.
3.2 Respondents

According to Saunders, Lewis & Thornhill, 2007, there are no specific rules of how many the respondents should be when using in-depth interviews as a method. The researcher should in these cases focus on the aim on the paper and what can optimally be done with the scarce resources. The scarce resource is in this case is the limited time available. I have chosen to interview four persons. The persons have been unrandomly chosen based on preinformation of their food retail chain preferences. Two people clearly prefer the S-chain and two people clearly prefer the K-chain. By choosing loyal customers from the two biggest food retail chains in Finland, the study will get a more diversified outcome about which factors can affect the customer loyalty, than it would have got if only one food retail chain was chosen. As stated in the theory section of this paper, there are only two main actors on the food retail market in Finland. These chains were chosen in this study because of their similarities in both size and pricing strategy. The persons chosen for the interviews live in the capital area of Finland and are likely to be equally targeted by marketing actions made by the two food retail chains. The respondentinformation is summarized in Table 1.
[Table]
4 Results
5 Discussion


