The affect of cell phone design on consumer purchasing behavior

1 Introduction

In today's society of Finland, it is uncommon to find a person who does not have a cell
phone. Consumers have a cell phone and they might even have two. Cell phones have
several attributes and design is one of those attributes. Looking at the almost endless
choices of cell phones, there is bound to be one that matches a consumer's personal
needs. The life-span of a specific cell phone model offered is getting shorter and a cell
phone is traded to a newer model at a faster rate than before. It seems that consumers
are now making more purchasing decisions concerning cell phones than had been done
in the past. It is therefore relevant to study on what basis these purchasing decisions are
made. As mobile phone companies offer more variety and choices for consumers, it is
worth investigating what consumers actually value highly when purchasing a new cell
phone in order to improve the current offering available to consumers.

Consumer behavior and purchasing behavior have been studied widely, and companies
are striving to obtain an understanding of how consumers behave and which factors
influence their behavior. The industry of mobile phones has also been studied; however,
the combination of consumer purchasing behavior in regard to cell phones has yet to be
studied to a larger extent. As cell phones have become a central part of the consumer's
everyday life, there is a gap in research that needs to be filled. By combining previous
research with the investigation done in this paper, this gap can, to an extent, be filled.

As cell phones are often offered in a variety of colors and the design of the phone
varies, the question is: do consumers value design highly when purchasing a cell phone,
or do the other attributes play a larger role? For some consumers it might even be a
question if the design of a cell phone has any effect on consumer purchasing behavior at
all. Therefore the main purpose of this paper is to investigate to what extent the design
of a cell phone affects the purchasing behavior of consumers.

1.1 Aim of the study

The main purpose of this paper is to investigate to what extent the design of a cell phone
affects the purchasing behavior of young consumers.


1.2 Structure of the paper

This paper is structured in the following way: Section two reviews the current literature
concerning consumer behavior in general with an emphasis on consumer purchasing
behavior and decision making. This section also discusses the different attributes that a
cell phone can have, including a further discussion on cell phone design. Chapter three
introduces the empirical method used for the investigation part of the paper. This
section includes the description of the method used in the study and a presentation of
the data obtained. Chapter four focuses on analyzing the data obtained and what can be
seen from the data. The paper ends with a discussion about the results and the
managerial implications of these results. An illustration of the structure of the paper is
presented below.

[Figure]

2 Background

(Not complete! I will add some more theory from articles, when I find good ones)

This section of the paper discusses the background and theory concerning the relevant
literature in regards to the aim of this study. The first section strives to define consumer
behavior, with a sub-section on consumer purchasing behavior. The second part of this
chapter looks into cell phone design and discusses a sample of designs that are
available. This section also includes a description of what different attributes cell
phones currently on the market might include.

2.1 Consumer behavior

In literature behavior is defined as "the physical actions of consumers that can be
directly observed and measured by others", also known as overt behavior. (Peter &
Olson 2008: 23) In other words, the behavior of consumers is something that can be
observed by the people around them and data can be collected in that way. There is
however a distinction between behavior that can be observed, to behavior that cannot be
observed by other individuals. Consumer behavior on the other hand is "the dynamic
interaction of affect and cognition, behavior, and environmental events". By affect the
authors refer to the "psychological response that involves a general positive/negative
feeling and varying levels of activation". Cognition is "the mental process of
interpretation and integration and the thoughts and meanings they produce". (Peter &
Olson 2008: 529-531)

For this paper consumer behavior is not regarded as only something that can be
observed by simply observing consumer behavior. This study therefore also considers
the cognitive part of behavior, as they are described by the consumers, as part of what is
meant by consumer behavior.

2.1.1 Consumer purchasing behavior

Purchasing behavior is something that involves the consumer making a decision about
what to buy and what the consumer looks for in a product. Consumer decision making
is defined as "the cognitive processes by which consumers interpret product information
and integrate that knowledge to make choices among alternatives". (Peter & Olson
2008: 531) What the consumer then does in a purchase situation is to piece together the
gathered information in order to come to a conclusion as to which product is the most
suited for the predefined purpose.

For this study purchasing behavior involves every action taken to make the decision to
purchase. This involves the identification of a certain need that the consumer finds
needs to be filled. In this case, the identification might be that the consumer needs a
new cell phone because the old one is broken, perhaps outdated, or simply that the
consumer finds that a particular phone is something that the consumer "must have". The
consumer might then look into the different options available on the market and select
one that has the features that fulfill the requirements the consumer has. In this paper the
purchasing behavior of consumers is considered to be everything that leads to the
consumer buying the cell phone.

2.2 Cell phone design

Nokia currently (13.10.2010) has 74 different cell phones on the market. A consumer
interested in buying a phone can browse through the different options by choosing the
particular shape or shapes the consumer wants to look at and then choose the most
important features the phone needs to have. (Nokia) When considering the various
brands that offer cell phones, there is bound to be phone that matches the needs of
consumers. The different shape options that Nokia offers for the cell phones are
traditional, foldable, slide and so on. The consumer can then rank the most important
features that the cell phone has to have. These features include Bluetooth, 3G, internet,
e-mail, radio and how many megapixels the camera needs to at least be. After finding
the desired model for the cell phone, the consumer can in most cases chose between
different colors for the phone. (Nokia) A selection of the cell phones that Nokia offers
can be found as Appendix 1 at the end of the paper.

3 Empirical method

This section of this paper begins with a discussion involving the overall empirical
method chosen for the investigation. After that there is a sub-section that goes through
the interview questions chosen. The following two sections describe the choice of
informants and the data collection process. The last part of this chapter describes the
way in which the data is analyzed.

3.1   The method chosen for this study

In order to answer the aim of the study that is to investigate to what extent the design of
a cell phone affects the purchasing behavior of young consumers, a qualitative research
study is performed. A qualitative research method was chosen here because it is better
suited to the research question. As the aim is to investigate how design affects
purchasing behavior and why, it is more suitable to investigate this qualitatively. In a
quantitative investigation, the data is numerical, whereas in a qualitative investigation
the data is non-numerical (words). When considering the aim of the investigation, the
more suitable option for this paper is a qualitative investigation. (Saunders, Lewis &
Thornhill 2007: 145)

The type of qualitative investigation method for this paper is interviews. Out of the
three forms of interviews; structures, semi-structured and open interviews, is the chosen
interview form in this case semi-structured. This is because structured interviews are too
much like questioners and limits what the informant can contribute to the data. As for
open interviews, this interview form does not limit the discussion enough to make sure
that the necessary data is obtained to answer the aim. The semi-structured interview
form is therefore the most suitable for this investigation, as it limits the discussion
somewhat, but does not exclude the option of asking follow-up questions regarding
something the informant has brought up. (Saunders et al 2007: 312)

3.1.1 Description of interview questions

The interview-guide is presented in Appendix 1 at the end of this paper. The interview
questions are meant to collect information about the informant's purchasing behavior
regarding cell phones. The first questions aim to find out what features the informant's
current phone possesses and what features are considered valuable. This is in order to
find out what the informant looks at when trying to find the most suitable phone for the
predefined purpose. The questions following are there to find out more about how the
informant acts when purchasing a cell phone. It is relevant to know what the informant
looks at first, in order to find out if design is one of the main features that the informant
finds important.

3.2 Choice of informants

The choice of informants for this investigation is done through convenience sampling.
(Saunders et al 2003: 234) The requirement for the informants is to be around their 20's
and had to own a cell phone. This requirement is set in order to define the group
investigated and to get a better picture of this group as a whole. The number of
informants is around 5-10 individuals (will be confirmed later) and this is seen as
enough as answers tend to start saturating after only a few interviews. As the goal of a
qualitative study is not to draw conclusions regarding the whole group of young
consumers and their purchasing behaviour regarding cell phones, it is not necessary to
have a large number of informants.

3.2.1 Data collection

(Description of what content will be included)

This section of the paper will describe how the data collection was done. This will
include the difficulties that were present and what was successful in the data collection.
If there were any problems in collecting the data it will be discussed here.

3.3 Analysis of data

The data is analyzed first by looking at what the informants answered overall to the
questions they were presented with. After the overall analysis of the data, there will be a
further discussion as to what the informants said in regard to the aim of the study. This
will include a comparison of the answers. The data is also compared with the literature
regarding the subject of consumer purchasing behavior.

4 Empirical results

(Description of what content will be included)

This section analyses the gathered data from the interviews in regards to the aim of the
study. The information gathered is discussed as whole, with an emphasis on the
discussion about the effects of cell phone design on purchasing behavior.


5 Conclusions and Implications

(Description of what content will be included)

This section of the paper draws conclusions based on the analysis in chapter four. More
practical information for companies is given through the discussion about the
implications of the results of this study for companies.

