Introduction

The public companies board and auditing activities have been discussed in public and caught the attention both internationally and in Finland. Auditing scandals in the early 2000s such as the demise of Enron and Arthur & Andersen have greatly scrutinized the investors’ confidence in the capital markets. The scandals caused investors, legislators, media and the companies themselves to question their board and auditing activities. In the United States these scandals was the origin for the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX), this is an extensive document with rules and regulations that all the public listed companies must comply with. In Finland a corporate governance recommendation was implemented 1.7.2004 and is the equivalent to the American SOX. The purpose of the recommendation is to guarantee that listed companies management is of a high standard and that the business is transparent. But the most notable issue is the improvement of the information flow between companies and its parties. The new recommendations have given rise to questions such as, how effective are the corporate governance recommendations? Has the changes effected the companies or not?
Audit committees have played an important role in the governance of corporations since their inception in the early 1940s, and their visibility and contribution have greatly increased in the past few years. Audit committees have been described as organizations guardians of financial integrity (Verschoor 2008). According to the recommendations the audit committee’s most important tasks are to improve the quality of the financial reporting, strengthen the internal audit, and work closely with the external auditor and the monitoring of the financial reporting process.
Prior research has mostly discussed the audit committee and its characteristics. Xie, Davidson and DaDalt (2003) and Klein (2002) analyzed how the audit committees and board members financial expertise effects the financial reporting. These studies showed that “earnings management” is not usual for companies that have an audit committee composed by members with a strong financial knowledge and education. According to Klein an independent board monitors the financial reporting far more effectively than a non-independent board. Cohen, Gaynor and Wright (2008) studied different aspects that effect the composition and effectiveness of audit committees. The studied showed that independence, size and expertise are the most important factors when putting together an audit committee. In accordance with most of the prior research Cohen et al. also find that an audit committee with independent members and a high financial knowledge was associated with an improved internal control and higher financial reporting quality.
As prior research has shown the audit committee does indeed add value to a company if the companies follow the recommendations regarding the members and their financial knowledge. Though these audit committees are still quite a new phenomenon in Finland more and more companies are trying to comply with the corporate governance recommendations and especially regarding the establishment of an audit committee. 
The purpose of this paper is to investigate if companies do comply with the rule and recommendations, that state that an audit committee member should have sufficient knowledge and education regarding economics and if so does it give the company any added value.

Prior Research

Corporate governance has been defined by Monks (1995) as the processes, management and principles that affect the way a company is governed. According to Zattoni and Cuomo (2008) the separation of ownership and control has laid the foundation for corporate governance. According to the recommendations stated in the Finnish Corporate Governance Code 2008, audit committees should appoint members that are financially literate or have a proven record within finance and accounting. Without these traits the audit committee will not be able to handle its tasks and be effective. 
Dezoort (1998) observes in his study that experience is an extremely important trait for audit committee members when it comes to internal control decisions. The results show that members with experience tend to make decisions like auditors. Experience is also important as problem situations in finance never tend to have a yes or no answer, and with experience it is easier to solve complex financial problems. Cohen, Gaynor, Krishnamoorthy och Wright (2008) investigated which factors that is of importance when establishing an audit committee and how it effects the committee’s effectiveness. Also in this study the results show that financial expertise is the most important quality needed by a member. The authors observe that members that are independent and are financially literate lead to better internal controls and reporting quality. Kam and Li (2008) investigate the relation between independent audit committees and the companies’ value. The results show that when an audit committee consists of more than 50 % expert independent directors it has a positive effect on the company’s value. The results also show that there is no positive correlation between company value and an audit committee without financial experts. Davidson, Xie och Xu (2006) studied the market’s reaction regarding the appointment of audit committee members. The authors claim that if the market can value the importance of a financial expert on the committee this should have a positive effect on the company’s value. The authors had a total of 136 observations, 87 where so called financial experts. The authors find a significant positive correlation between an audit committee member with financial expertise and the company’s stock price. Jengfang, Rong-Ruey och Fujing (2008) study investigated whether company’s with an audit committee have better returns compared to company’s without an audit committee. The results clearly show that companies without an audit committee have lower returns. The explanation to this was that companies with an audit committee tend to have higher internal controls and better monitoring. This gives the company a more reliable picture to investors and other third parties. 

Carcello, Hollingsworth, Klein and Neal (2006) examine the associations between audit committee financial expertise and alternate corporate governance mechanisms and earnings management. The findings claim that financial expertise does indeed reduce earnings management for company’s with weak alternate governance mechanisms. The results also show that if the company has alternate corporate governance mechanisms that work it is an effective substitute for the audit committee. Ernst & Young (2007) researched the audit committee composition. They surveyed audit committee chairs, audit committee members, board members and others from 176 companies around the world. In the survey the question regarding audit committee composition was “What is the single most important area of expertise sought in recruiting new audit committee members?” 34 % of audit committees look for a new member that qualify as a financial expert and 24 % look for executive/CEO experience. 15 % indicate their audit committee looks for new members with industry experience, 16 % look for other areas of expertise including international experience and diverse financial experience.

Research Method and Purpose

The purpose of this paper is to present through a literature overview the prior research regarding audit committee members characteristics and if these characteristics add any more value to the company. By analyzing the results from prior research I will summaries the results and discuss and further analyze them. 

Analysis and Results

Due to the financial scandals that have occurred many financial experts in the field have willingly researched the question regarding corporate governance and the audit committee. Most of the prior research has indeed based its focus on the member’s characteristics and added value that can be achieved with an effective audit committee. As we can see a majority of the authors are in agreement that an effective and working audit committee has to consist of financial experts. The term financial expert is discussed in most of the prior researches and is a bit blurred. But according to most of the studies a financial expert is a member that either has a high financial education or a proven track record on the job market. As we can see from prior research corporate governance has become more important for the large and multinational companies. Especially Kam and Li (2008) study shows the importance of good corporate governance. The authors used as sample the 200 biggest companies from the Fortune 500 during the year 2000. And divided the members into two different groups expert independent directors and financed trained directors. As earlier mentioned the results clearly show that a expert and financed trained director will add value to the company as long as the rest of the audit committee members also are financially literate. As stated earlier the foundation for corporate governance was the separation of ownership and control. Kam and Li study also sheds light on this statement, as there results state that if the Managing director also acts as the chairman of the board this significantly effect the companies value. 



Discussion and Conclusion








