1 INTRODUCTION
Ever since the beginning of the 21st century, media consumption habits have been fragmented exponentially. Large factor in this transformation has been the rise of the internet era. Social media, smartphones, and blogs are just single examples of the technical and social advancements that shape the world we live in. This has led to a change in the way consumers use media, as more and more people are turning from traditional media, such as newspapers, to digital services. Consumers expect advertising content in digital media to be tailored for their needs. This creates challenges for companies but it also presents opportunities. 

In 2011 the amount of media advertising in Finland was 1 395 million euro’s (TNS Gallup, 2012). In Finland’s scale this is a huge amount of money to be distributed. At the moment, online advertising is the only form of media in Finland that has grown during the first half of the year 2012, accounting for 116 million euros of the entire media consumption. (TNS Media Intelligence, 2012) Why is online advertising gaining such popularity and how can companies implement digital media channels as a part of their marketing mix in a functional way? This study looks to answer those questions and to make an overview of the ongoing transitional face of the media landscape from traditional to a new, digital one.

Media means a tool for delivering or storing information. Digital media in its original sense means an electronic form of media where data is either stored or delivered in digital form, such as in television. Today digital media has grown to be synonymous with media delivered through Internet or mobile applications, where as television has been labeled as a broadcasting media. The reason for this is that traditionally broadcasting media has been a one-way transitional media, with the possibility of only transmitting information but not receiving it, whereas in digital (internet) media the possibility of dialogue nearly always exists. In the future, when smart-TV s will grow in numbers, there may be a need to revaluate this segmentation as televisions will provide a possibility for a dialogue as well.

Here I will add more info on media industry and on the basis of the research

METHODS
This research will be conducted using qualitative methods such as expert interviews. Part of the research material will be based on existing literature as well as internet sources, such as newsletters and blogs. Due to the continuous development and transition of the industry, most printed literature sources are old when printed and do not represent the most up to date information possible. Therefore printed literature sources are mainly used for creating a general overview of media industry. In different situations, if literature information is not available, the researcher will also lean to personal experience from the media industry. Despite this, the researcher will always look for to use literature sources to protect ones academic integrity from making subjective assumptions.

Here I will add more information on methodology.
RESULTS
Here I will present results once they are obtained.

DISCUSSION
Discussion chapter

REFERENCES
Reference list
