Does familiarity with internal controls make internal auditors experts in risk management

Introduction 
Internal auditing has come a long way from being a clerical service function and monitoring activities to being an assurance and consultative function that is involved in a wide range of services (Moeller, 2009, pp.11-14).  According to the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA), 2010), internal auditors have “an in-depth understanding of the business culture, systems, and processes” of the organisations they are working for. This knowledge stems from the wide ranging activities they perform for their organisations (Moeller, 2009, pp.11-14). The IIA also asserts that the internal audit function “provides assurance that internal controls in place are adequate to mitigate risks, governance processes are effective and efficient, and organizational goals and objectives are met”. They in effect assess and evaluate the systems designed and implemented by management. This “assurance” service calls for professional judgment from internal auditors which is reported to the board of directors through an independent audit committee (Moeller, 2009; Spira and Page, 2003; BPP Publishing, 2005). 
A survey by Leung et al. (2003) found that the role of the internal audit activity revolved around internal controls, risks and compliance with corporate governance requirements. Another key finding was that internal auditors also reported having access to the board and the audit committee. This is significant because senior management is accountable to the board and the internal audit function can only be effective in adding value if management adopts their recommendations. 
The internal audit function is itself an internal control system put in place by management to ensure that management control systems are running effectively and efficiently, to safeguard the assets of the company and to be a deterrent to fraud (BPP Publishing, 2005). It is also required to serve as a “watchdog” gauging and reporting on any significant risks and loopholes in the control environment that will have a negative impact in achieving the organisation’s objectives (Moeller, 2009). Implementing a strong internal control is important because one of the reasons advanced for the failures of giants like Enron and WorldCom was the absence or abuse of their internal control systems (Verschoor, 2002).
Link auditors to risk management and focus on significance of risk management
Internal auditing is a component of a good internal control system (Spira and Page, 2003)
The significance of the Internal controls system 
Following the demise of many large corporate giants, regulators have sponsored research such as the Turnbull report in the UK, COSO in the US, the King report in South Africa etc. The objective of these reports has being to recommend a conceptual framework for implementing a sound system of internal control. The collapse of Enron, WorldCom, etc has being blamed on the absence or lack of an effective system of control (Zhou and Zhou, 2007).
The Committee of Sponsoring Organisations (COSO) has the most widely used and recognised definition of internal controls. COSO (1992), defines internal control as;
“...a process, affected by an entity’s board of directors, management, and other personnel, designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the achievement of objectives in the following categories: effectiveness and efficiency of operations; reliability of financial reporting and compliance with applicable laws and regulations”
The internal control system is the responsibility of management (Krishnan, 2005). A sound internal control system will provide management with reasonable assurance that its corporate objectives are being met (office of Audit and Compliance Review). It is also a key factor in the production of quality financial reports (Krishnan, 2005). It serves as a deterrent to fraud and misstatements in the financial reports and is crucial in promoting corporate governance (Spira and Page, 2003). The Combined Code stated that companies without an internal audit department should annually review the need for one (p.36). According to Jan (2005), the internal audit function serves as an “enabler” of corporate governance. The report by the Cadbury Committee (1992, 4.32) recommended that;
 “directors should make a statement in the report and accounts on the effectiveness of their system of internal control and that the auditors should report thereon”. 
The committee asserts that a sound system of internal control will enhance and protect stakeholder value. COSO (2010) also believes that such a system will result in increased profitability and reduction in unwanted risks and surprises. A good internal control system depends on the control environment (Krishnan, 2005). 
A “strong” control environment is “the overall attitude, awareness and actions of directors and managers regarding internal controls and their importance to the entity”. In other words, it is the tone from the top because it is affected by the actions of management such as management style and philosophy, organisational culture, segregation of duties (BPP Publishing, 2005). Management is accountable to the board of directors and audit committees for the internal control system. 
There have being calls from regulators, professionals and academics for audit committees to review and monitor the internal control environment (Krishnan, 2005). Krishnan (2005) investigated the quality of audit committees and internal controls in the US and found that companies with independent audit committees where at least one member had a financial background suffered less internal control setbacks. Internal control deficiencies are also common among firms that are small, younger, and lack an internal audit department (Ge and McVay, 2005; Doyle et al. 2005; Doyle and McVay, 2007). One of the reasons cited for the failure of Enron was its lack of a good internal control system (Verschoor 2002). Ashbaugh-Skaife et al.() also found that firms that invested less resources in their internal control experienced more problems with their systems. 
Other studies in this area have looked at impact that a sound system of internal control has on stakeholder value. Jacqueline et al. (2008) found that investors used information about a company’s internal control such as the effectiveness of the system, and its integrity when deciding to invest in that company. The authors also report that policy makers want investors to be aware that deficiencies in a company’s internal control system is an indication that future financial reports will be misstated and misleading. 
There has being a consensus finding that a firm that reports a weakness in its internal control system will suffer a negative return from investors (Beneish et al. (2008) ; Ge and mcVay (2005); Jacqueline et al. (2008)).
One other major finding registered by some of the researchers already mentioned above is that audit committee independence is a strong indicator of a sound internal control system. The audit committee therefore acts on behalf of the board to ensure that the internal control system put in place by management is sound and effective in meeting corporate objectives. The audit committee delegates this responsibility to the internal auditors. The job entails reviewing;
“... all the policies and procedures (internal controls) adopted by the directors...of an entity to ensure, as far as practicable, the orderly and efficient conduct of its business, including adherence to internal policies, the safeguarding of assets, the prevention and detection of fraud and error, the accuracy and completeness of financial records, and the timely preparation of reliable financial information...”
(BPP Publishing, 2005).
Internal auditors are therefore assisting management to successfully carryout their tasks. They also provide reasonable assurance to management as to the adequacy, sufficiency, integrity and reliability of the internal control system. This is achieved by continuous testing, assessment, monitoring and evaluation of the system (Fadzil et al. 2005). According to Sawyer and Vinten (1996), internal auditors provide a better foundation for management judgments through better quality information which is “timely”, “reliable” and significant to both strategic and operational decision-making. They can accomplish this task and “add value” to their organisations because they have a more thorough understanding of the organisational units than anyone else (Spira and Page, 2003).

Internal auditing
Over the last couple of years, the internal auditing function has evolved from an entirely monitoring role that focuses primarily on reporting to management and the directors on the “adequacy and effectiveness of components of the accounting and internal control systems” (BPP Publishing, 2005). 
As defined by the Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA)UK, that role has changed and internal auditors now have more responsibility and scope to make an impact on shareholder value within an organisation. The Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors UK defines internal auditing as follows; 
“Internal auditing is an independent, objective assurance and consulting activity designed to add value and improve an organization's operations. It helps an organization accomplish its objectives by bringing a systematic, disciplined approach to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk management, control, and governance processes”.
The definition considers the work of internal auditors to be independent even though they are employed by management, to perform tasks assigned to them by management and can be dismissed by management. One reason is that most internal auditors today are trained and professionally qualified. 
Research has shown that internal audit departments are found in large companies which in most instances have audit committees to whom the internal auditors report to thereby asserting their independence (). The Institute of Internal Auditors – UK and Ireland issued a position statement to its members entitled The Role of Internal Audit in Risk Management in 2002 to guide members on what activities they could engage in without compromising their independence. This is shown in figure 1 below. This guidance strongly encourage members to be engaged in activities such as evaluating and reviewing risk management processes and reports, and assurance services for their companies. In a bid to preserve their independence, the IIA – UK and Ireland not be involved in activities that require them to setting of risk appetite and management of risks, assuming risks or be accountable for risks. These areas will cause conflicts for the internal auditors for instance if they are accountable for a risk, and give an assurance or an opinion on it, there will a conflict of interest problem.
 Moeller and Herbert (2009) in their book “ Brink’s Modern Internal Auditing” are of the opinion that internal auditors can assume the roles shown in figure 1  because they have a much better understanding of their company’s organisational units than anyone else in the organisation. They can thus assess and review the operations of their organisations in every possible area from the highest to the lowest level. The 1947 definition by the Institute of Internal Auditors (cited in Davis 1956, p.227) emphasised the role of internal auditors as “...the basis for protective and constructive service to management...” and their sole purpose is to “assist management in achieving the most efficient administration of the operations of the organisation”. They perform this role by reporting to management as needed on the efficiency and adequacy of the internal control systems while also highlighting areas that need improvement (Davis, 1956, pp. 227-233).
The collapse of giants like Enron has shown us that a lack of internal controls is a recipe for disaster for any organisation. This is why management employs internal auditors to act on their behalf with regards to internal controls and add value to the organisation by reporting on their findings directly to the audit committee. 
The audit committee is formed by the board of directors and constitutes independent directors.  Internal auditors can report weaknesses and any fraud being perpetuated by management without any fear of recrimination from management.
Internal auditors and risk management 
According to Krogstad et al. (1999), the purpose of controls is to assist management to successfully handle its organisational risks while also promoting good governance. Internal auditing is considered to be a form of internal control (Moeller, 2009). Internal auditors perceive internal controls as a “subset of risk management” (IIA UK, 1999). While research is still not clear on which of risk or control should come first, Blackburn (1999, p.36) has stated that the emphasis should be on the functions that assists the organisation in meeting its corporate objectives. This view is also shared by the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants which believes controls include identifying or recognising and mitigating risks (CICA 1999, p.9). A survey by Paape et al. (2003) in 15 European countries found that risk management was already a significant part of the internal audit function. Allegrini and D'Onza (2003) also found that within large Italian companies, internal auditors were part of the risk management process. They acted as consultants, reporting, assessing and monitoring the risk management process and reporting their findings to management. Senior management also agrees that the internal audit function has moved away from compliance to strategic risk management (Sarens and Beelde, 2006; Allegrini and D'Onza, 2003). 
A survey of Belgian companies operating in Belgium and the US by Sarens and Beelde (2006) concluded that the role of internal audit in risk management and assessment is having a significant impact on “global audit planning and individual audits”.
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of England and Wales (ICAEW) advises that implementation of the Turnbull guidance of 1999 should involve a combination of internal controls and risk management (Jones and Sutherland, 1999). The ICAEW (2000, p.9) also considers internal auditors as key advisers on internal controls and risks because of their status and role within the organisational hierarchy and their independent status. The internal audit function has and is undergoing changes partly in response to research papers for instance (Selim and McNamee, 1999) that have proposed that internal audit must evolve in “culture and competencies” before it can be effectively aligned to risk management (Spira and Page, 2003). A research by KPMG (1999) found that internal auditors have a fundamental role to play in identifying, mitigating and evaluating their organisational risks.
According to Spira and Page (2003), internal auditing professional bodies are exhorting their members to present themselves as experts in risk management by improving on their professional skills. This can be done through the identification of their most significant risks that must be mitigated or exploited in order to add stakeholder value (Sarens and Beelde, 2006).
The significance of categorising internal auditors as risk experts can be seen through the lenses of corporate governance were risk management is a component. The objective of corporate governance is to ensure that the agents (senior management) are devoting their time and knowhow for the maximisation of short -and –long values for the principals (stakeholders). 
The role of internal audit in enterprise risk management (ERM)
One of the first reports that underscored the relationship between internal control and risk management was the Turnbull report (1999) in the UK (Sarens and Beelde, 2006). The Institute of Internal Auditors- UK (IIA UK), has stated that internal auditors plays a key role in implementing ERM. 
ERM has evolved from the concept of risk management in the financial and insurance sectors. It is considered to be a holistic process which is carried out from an enterprise-wide perspective. Its goal is to assist management in meeting its organisational objectives. While the onus on ERM remains with the board, the IIA, UK believes the internal audit function can provide reasonable assurance to management as to the effectiveness of its risk management strategies.
According to Sarens and Beelde (2006), respondents from a survey in the US have stated that their organisations cannot subsist without a sound internal control system. They also contend that companies are meeting this need by formally documenting and communicating policies on risk management and internal control to key stakeholders notably employees and the board. The comparative study conducted by Sarens and Beelde (2006) titled  “internal auditors’ perception about their role in risk management: a comparison between US and Belgian companies” found that internal auditors are deeply involved in the following areas of ERM; “development”, “re-engineering” and “facilitation”. Internal auditors are heavily involved in the early stages of designing an ERM system with possible questionnaire development, but as the project progresses, their role decreases.  They also organise training sessions at the behest of management on risk management and provide formal reports on their findings on the internal control and risk management system. This also contributes to transparency and enhances their role another role for internal auditors as facilitators of corporate governance. A role brought to prominence by the emphasis that regulators and investors have placed on the internal control environment which provides the platform for effective risk management.
Other professional bodies see internal auditors as adding value to their organisations through risk management (Sarens and Beelde, 2006). ERM is effective when embedded in the strategic decision planning process by management. Internal auditors will identify, assess, and monitor any deficiencies during and after the implementation of an ERM by the chief risk officer. They should therefore play a very limited role in advising management on how to implement an ERM system to avoid compromising their independence when evaluating and reporting on the effectiveness of the system.
Their general understanding of the functioning of the organisational structure make them consultants and increases the role they play at early stages of the ERM implementation process. The scope of their role will depend on the resources available. Notably qualified and experienced staff to act as a leader and enabler of the ERM process. The presence of an audit committee to whom they can report to will help in preserving their independence and give them managerial prominence within the organisation (Spira and page, 2003). It should also emphasised that internal auditors can only add value by collaborating with management. That is, when management implements or at least considers their recommendations when making decisions on policy issues. 
[Figure]
Analysis and Discussion

Conclusion and further research

