Organisational Selling of Services

1. Introduction
There are many different definitions of the term selling. All of these definitions explain that a salesman must through the usage of a selling message control the potential customers decision process. For example, Mercuri International defines selling as:
	”Influencing the other party in a manor that results in positive decision making for the salesman”

The salesman’s competitors are not only the direct competitors, but also the customers possibility of conducting the job by themselves or refraining from using the service can be regarded as competing alternatives. In addition to these there are also several external company-specific factors that influence the potential customers purchasing behaviour. The model below is directed to companies that sell services, but can also be used to describe the situation of the potential clients company.

Factors affecting the selling of services: 
 
As we can see from the model, the result of sales is a multifactorial function which makes selling a very complex process.


1.1. Purpose
The purpose of this paper is to determine the factors that affect the potential customer’s decision-making at a sales opportunity and the various methods by which sellers can meet their goals of getting the potential customer to commit to a purchase.

1.2. Structure of the paper
Since the client’s needs and concerns are the root of all sales the paper will first present the purchasing behaviour of companies. Thereafter the process that a salesman goes through in order to conduct a sale is presented. Then a few frameworks for customer-focused argumentation that can be used during the selling process will be presented. However, it is important for the salesman to understand what kind of questions should be asked in order to receive the necessary information that salesmen can base their argumentations on, and therefore a few different questioning techniques will also be presented.





2. Organizational purchasing behaviour 
The customer’s decision-making process consists of, according to Mercuri International, 20% rational factors and 80% emotional factors. Jobber, Lancaster (2007) claims that organizational buyers are less affected by emotional factors than consumer buyers. Gathered below is a table presenting different rational and emotional factors. 
Rational factors	Emotional factors
Price	Prestige
Delivery	Personal risk minimization
Productivity	Entertainment
Life cycle costs	Reciprocity
Reliability	Confidence
Durability	Comfort
Safety	Quiet life

However, all of these factors, whether rational or emotional, relate to the needs of the customer.

According to Jobber, Lancaster (2007), the needs of organizational buyers can be divided into three categories that make up a process:
1.	Structure: ”the Who” factor – reflects who participates in the decision-making and their specific roles.
2.	Process: The ”How” factor – describes the pattern of information retrieval, analysis, evaluation and decision making that occurs when a buying organization moves toward a decision
3.	Content: The ”What” factor – describes the choice of criteria used at different stages of the process and by different makers.


Even though some companies follow the organizational buying behaviour described by Jobber, Lancaster (2007), it is still important to realize that it is ultimately people who buy, not organizations. This is important to remember when the seller takes the customers needs to account.

2.1. The Customers Needs
Developers can take advantage of using the customers needs as the basis of their argumentation. When they sell by first finding out and understanding the customer needs and then base the sale on those needs (Strandvik et al. 2012). 

The customer’s needs are based on their mental models about their company and the strategy that influences their priorities, decision-making and actions  (Strandvik et al. 2012).

Companies often explain that their strategies and goals are not respected by salesmen, who tend to only present their own products or services (Strandvik et al. 2012). It  thus appears that the salesman’s mental models differ from that of their potential customers. Several companies further explain that salesmen should be willing to understand the business of their potential customers as well as how their product or service can be used to improve the business (Strandvik et al. 2012).  Customers, their strategies and goals are the primary drivers of business, not salesmen and their products (Strandvik et al. 2012). Salesmen must therefore take the potential customer’s strategy, mission and vision into account when they sell. 

Customers needs can be split into three categories: task-oriented needs, experience-oriented needs and time-based needs (Strandvik et al. 2012). These are the needs that salesmen should try to satisfy with the help of the products or services that they sell: value is created when these needs are satisfied. Value can be created for task-oriented needs when the customer’s daily work is made easier. Value can be created for experience-oriented needs when the customers performance is improved through the usage of the salesman’s product or service. Value can also be created for time-based needs when the customer can improve their use of time with the help of the product or service that the salesman provides. (Strandvik et al. 2012).

By combining the claim that 80% of companies decision making is based on emotional factors with the results of the Strandvik et al. 2012 study we can understand that the customer needs to receive an emotional benefit to their task-, experience-, or time-oriented problems before the customer makes a decision to buy.

2.2.The Power of Recommendations
Recommendations can and should be used by salesman when dealing with objections. Upon being recommended to a potential client the chances of completing a sale will be much higher.

Lets take the accounting market, where the usage of recommendations has been proven to be the most important method of sales (O'Donohoes, 1991), as an example. Out of 290 companies interviewed in the U.S., 72% claimed that recommendations influenced their decision making when choosing an accountant (George, 1980). When someone recommends an accountant to a company, the company creates an image of the accountants reputation. The word ”reputation” is defined as ”an informal description of someone or something based on the hearsay”  (Sasser, 2011). Wheiler (Wheiler, 1987) examined the recommendations of accountants, bankers and lawyers in the United States. It was found that a person who recommends a service has to have trust in that the service will be able to deliver promptly, be good at customer relations and provide access to the managers (Wheiler, 1987). In other words the accountants reputation has to be good enough to deserve being recommended. How companies experienced the accountants reputation was proven to be the primary factor during the selection of an accountant (Taylor, 1962). A good reputation that leads to recommendations in this case can be created from such ledgers of quality. 
3. The Sales Process
Among the better known frameworks of the sales process is the AIDA model developed by Strong (1925) in his book The Psychology of Selling. According to the AIDA model, the customer needs to pass through four mental states before purchasing a product or service. The salesman must first create awareness of the potential customer (attention), then raise the interest of the potential customer, where after the interest needs to be turned into desire resulting in action. However, the AIDA model has been criticized for being more marketing oriented than sales oriented.

Regardless of which model is used to analyse the sales process there are a few unavoidable events that occur when selling services. These are the sales call, the meeting and the decision-making. The transitions between these events will also demand preparation by both the salesman and the potential client. Even though selling is a process that is commonly regarded as independent from other functions of companies, it has been proven that the support functions provided by companies have a great impact on the total sales.


3.1. The Sales Call
According to Mercuri International, a good build up of a sale call includes:
1.	A brief introduction including a break
2.	An explanation of where you are calling from
3.	An answer to the question ”why should the customer see me?”
4.	A few date proposals
5.	A confirmation and a nice ending

3.2. Preparing for a Meeting
A salesman can prepare for a sales call by formulating clear arguments. A brief background study and drafting the questions concerning the identification of the client’s situation belongs to a well-prepared salesman’s preparation activities.

A salesman should avoid making assumptions as these may lead to the salesman steering the meeting in the wrong direction.

The planning of the argument should be based on the claim the 80% of the customer decision-making is based on emotional factors. The salesman has three types of arguments to his or her disposal: what the product or service is, what the product or service gives to the customer and what the product or service means to the customer. Arguing by explaining what the product or service is ineffective since there usually are an abundance of alternatives on the market. By using the arguments of what the service gives and means for the customer the salesman can easier infiltrate the emotional factors that compose the potential customers decision-making process. A good salesman lays emphasis on arguments related to what the product or service gives and means to the potential customer.


3.3. The Meeting

Here I will present the SATA and FOCA models.
3.4. How to handle objections

3.5. Encouraging Decision-making

3.6. The contents of a formal proposal

3.7. Re-occurring Sales & Customer Relations

3.8. The Strategy Should Support the Sale
4. Customer Oriented Reasoning

4.1. FOCA

4.2. DABA
5. The Importance of Question Asking

5.1. The Difference Between Open and Closed Questions

5.2. Some Practical Tips for the Presentation of Good Questions

6. Summary
Here I will summarize the models into a one-page executive summary and an info-graph. 

