Culture consumption of Japanese popular culture in Finland
Introduction
Research on Japanese popular culture consumption in Finland focus on Fans who devote themselves to Japanese popular culture positively. Fewer studies examine the attitudes and consumption on Japanese popular culture of Finns beyond the Fans. In terms of business potential, those Finns still could be profit resource of Japanese popular culture business as long as businessmen know their preference. This paper seeks to contribute to the study of culture consumption and social perception on Japanese popular cultural of Finns who are out of the Fans community. Specifically, this paper identifies the most attractive business potential of Japanese popular culture in Finland by investigating Finns’ consumption preferences.   

Foundations of Japanese popular culture are manga, anime, fashion, video games, music, film and television. There is a huge value space for those industries and the peripheral products. In Italy, anime and manga emerged as media for children. In US, back to 1977, a local organization in Los Angels started regularly screening Japanese anime. (Ishida, 2010) The prevalence of anime and manga catalyzed businesses such as language translation and clothing and so on. 

However, in Finland, “compared to other markets worldwide, the Finnish market exhibits a degree of disadvantage in the potential growth of anime and manga. “ (Ishida, 2010) Culture difference is the stumbling block of prevalence of Japanese popular culture in Finland. “Though the history of manga and anime in Finland begins in the 1970s, it is only in recent years that they have infiltrated Finnish popular culture. At the time when the first anime productions were on TV, they were very well received. However, it was notunderstood until the 90's that those productions were specifically anime.” (Ishida, 2010) Obviously, in order to be accepted immediately and successfully in Finland, the foreign culture embedded in the business has to be understood by Finns. In addition, overcoming those barriers requires perception on Finns’ acceptance of Japanese popular culture. In other words, businessmen must understand what Finns intend to purchase. Therefore, this paper investigates Finns’ preference and culture consumption habitat on Japanese popular culture to provide initial information on choosing a profitable Japanese popular culture business.  

This paper investigates Finns’ attitudes on certain dimensions of Japanese popular culture that involve in Finns’ daily life instead of study Fans community. The research question is what Japanese culture product will be accepted with minimumrejection by Finns. In doing so, this paper enriches the lacking information of influence of Japanese popular culture on Finns’ daily life of previous studies.  

This paper is organized into five sections. Following this introduction, the second section provides a conceptual overview of Japanese popular culture consumption in Finland including the relationship between different dimensions of Japanese popular culture and Finns’ daily life. The third section presents the paper’s data and methodology. This section explores the background information of each Japanese popular culture factor that Finns might concern. Section four presents the results of interviews of Finns’ attitudes and their consumption habitats on Japanese popular culture. The conclusion section surmises the indication of research results and suggests on business potential of Japanese popular culture in Finland.  
Literature review
Be local or global: a debate on culture and consumption
A critical issue for retailors and manufactures who are seeking to expand their operations internationally is whether adapting products for local markets. According to Levitt and his supporters, a standard global product can be successful in all markets because the world is becoming increasingly homogenized. However, this proposition then challenged by Littler and Schlieper with the argument that “Levitt’s theory fails to take into account consumer influences on the way the product is used, positioned and perceived.” (Deirdre, 1998) In developed countries, consumption has moved beyond its primary function of serving basic human needs and is increasingly linked to symbolic meanings, values and lifestyles that are likely to be specific to local cultures. Usunier noted that there is few truly universal products exist due to culture differences across countries that remain a significant barrier to internationalization, especially in ‘culture-bound’ industries, such as food and beverages. 

It is clearly that consumption decisions are inextricably linked to their cultural context. The culture background of consumers is a potential barrier to market development. To overcome this barrier, organizations must develop a deeper understanding of local cultures and their influence upon purchasing decisions. (Deirdre, 1998)

What links culture, consumption and product choice?
A conceptualizing relationship between culture, consumption and product choice developed by Deirdre (1998) indicates that the presence of culture affects individual tastes and preferences, which ultimately influences consumption behavior. First, at the broadest level, culture is a shared experience, consisting of learned behaviors that directly impinge on individual consumer decisions within a society. Consumption has become an active social process, deeply rooted in cultural procedures. Second, culture impacts on consumer product choice by its influence in the formation of beliefs and attitudes. In other words, beyond personal preference, culture context is the foundation of consumers’ choice. Personal preference affects the general choice such as color and price while culture impacts the essential product rang, for example, which item would be popular in target market depends on the culture embedded in the market. 

Culture product and consumption: a framework of culture consumption in Finland
“Culture marketing is the art of making contact with market segments that are likely to be interested in the product by adapting the marketing variables-price, distribution and promotion-in order to put the product in contact with a sufficient number of consumers.” Although culture product represents its original culture, it still needs to be adapted to fit in different market segments. Therefore, culture product contains multiple culture factors rather than its original one. 

Culture product distribution is determined by consumer’s form of consumption. It designed for both collective consumption and individual consumption. Collective consumption products to consumers gain access by gathering in one place for a set period time such as a show or a film. For individual consumption, which consumers can enjoy whenever and wherever they desire. For instance, recordings, books and visual works of art owned by the consumer are individual consumption products. 

In Finland, the culture consumption pattern has been changed a lot since 1990s’. Traditional culture consumption pattern in Finland have more weight on collective elements rather than strategies of distinction that take unity and homogeneity as key values. There is a preference for cultural products of domestic origin in Finland. However, in recent years, there are changes in both the frequency of consumption and the choices themselves. The nature of culture consumption is becoming less serious, more touristy, more a genuine pleasure, more related to personality. (Likkanen)

One stable aspect of culture consumption in Finland is that men and women take different attitudes towards art and culture. Based on the theory of gender system that developed by Yvonne Hirdman, separation and hierarchy are two key principles of study gender system. “Separation implies that woman and womanhood can be clearly distinguished from man and manhood; and hierarchy that man and manhood are more highly valued than woman and womanhood.” (Liikkanen) In Finland, men are still heavily oriented towards technology, engineering sciences, economic sciences, in general towards professional occupations. On the contrary, women read more than men; they show a strong orientation to non-fiction, entertainment and high culture. Those differences are still clear in their leisure choices. 

In addition, younger generations show a stronger preference for audiovisual culture and for foreign products, especially among young males. Young women are still fancy traditional leisure even they are also quite keen in everything that is new.   
(Japanese pop culture consumption and consumption in Finland
“Pop culture is viewed as emerging from a continually changing and socially related set of contemporary behaviors, images, practices and product that result form the interaction of individuals, groups, media, the art, and organizations as they attempt to entertain, communicate ideas, and give meaning to a range of symbols, activities and social developments in a society.  “(Simeon, 2006) the nature of pop culture is dynamic which correspond to the nature of culture consumption. 

Generally, Japanese pop culture refers to manga, anime, fashion, video games, music, film and television. 

Obviously, Japanese pop culture is a ‘culture-bound’ business that emphasis the importance of understanding Finnish consumption culture. ) Lacking information, need to be revised
Methodology
The study model used to analyze Finn’s consumption preference on Japanese popular culture product is based on the secondary data and study reviews of pervious studies in the form of qualitative research method. This paper focus on individual consumption that product are occupied personally. 

According to Deirdre (1998) and Liikkanen, culture rooted in consumer’s background impacts consumption and product choices. Therefore, when studying the potential profit space of a new product, the consumption culture of target market is the essential starting point. In this study, the equivalent starting point is market segmentation specifying by gender. 

The components of Japanese popular culture are classified according to gender because of the significant difference on culture consumption between women and men in Finland. The component of Japanese popular is not failed into gender category randomly, a pre-analysis of nature of each component shows the potential gender classification. 

Future, the gender segmentations are refined by age and social class to locate Finns’ consumption preference more detailed. 
Result
Gender definition of Japanese popular culture component
[Table]
Discussion

Conclusion

