Introduction
Online shopping is one of the modern technical solutions, which has seen daylight due to the fact that Internet is available almost everywhere and to everyone. More and more people around the world buy some of their clothing from online shops. This can been noticed as online shops have grown a lot, and there are more and more actors in this specific field of business. What are the reasons for consumers buy clothing online?To understand this question, a study about online clothing shops will be conducted. The study will concentrate on two mainissues;what attracts customers to online shops, and what makes them buy clothing online.
The reason for this study is to get knowledge ofwhy consumers buy clothing online. This information can be important and later used by my own company. I havefounded anonline shop with a partner a few weeks ago. We will sell street wear for male adults between 18-35. The study will give us valuable information of our target group, and will give an advantage to succeed over the competitors.
The target group of the study will be restrictedto a specificage group. This group consists of young male adults between 18-35 years old. The reason for this is that this specific target group is the target group for my own company and this information gives valuable information. The other thing is that different consumer groups behave differently and therefore it is important to tie the data gathering to a certain target group. This will also help me to draw specific conclusions of the consumers I try to attract.
The paper will be structured in five parts. These will be; Introduction, Method, Results, Discussion, and Conclusion.In the methods part I will discuss and open the methods that are going to be used, where the data will be gathered from, and how it will be done. In the results part I will just present the findings. The results will be then analyzed and discussed. In the end a conclusion of the study will be available.
This study will most likely answer why men, between 18-35 years old, buy street wear online. I’m hoping to be able to use this valuable information for my own business and gain an advantage over the competitors. 
Online shops
Online shops are shops where you can buy items online. The customer can often choose between several payment methods, e.g. credit or debit card, cash on delivery, postal order money, gift cards, wire transfer. Then the items will be delivered according to the available options. These are most likely shipping or pickup. The biggest online shops worldwide are Ebay and Amazon.com, and in Finland NetAnttila, Hobby Hall and verkkokauppa.com. (Wikipedia)Online shops are to be used and visited with Internet browsers. During recent times some shops have even developed sub sites for mobile and tablet users(Mashable, 2012).
Advantages of online shops
If normal shops are compared to online shops, there are a few obvious advantages. Online shops are basically always available, whereas normal shops are open only on daytime. Therefore the consumer can buy and order items whenever it fits their schedule.
In addition customers can constantly get information about the items, brands, and their quality. In normal stores, the customers can’t reach other customers reviews and opinions. They just need to trust their instinct. Some online shops allow customers to rate and give feedback according to their experiences of the items and the service. The available information concern also price comparison between online shops. While comparing prices, customers can also compare what paying and delivery options are available.
Disadvantages of online shops
As earlier mentioned, there are definite pros while shopping online. However, there are also cons. Customers can’t see or try the products while shopping online. They have to trust the available information and pictures. Especially when buying items of an unknown brand, there is a risk of not getting the quality, which is expected. If a customer wants to ask something, often one have to send an email to get an answer, whereas at a physical store the clerk can help immediately.
Security is always an issue when shopping online.  As customers can’t see the product before payment, one can receive something that was not desired. Another issue is the robbery of confidential information like credit card details. If this happens, one can’t notice this before money is spent. However there is ways to ensure that the sites are secured and have legit certification to encrypt valuable information. Secondly, a customer can always search for other customers’ reviews about the service and see if someone has had any problems before. One could say: the bigger and more known shop, the better and secure it is.
As earlier mentioned, a customer can’t see the product before they receive it. Therefore the return of the items could be counted in disadvantages, as one has to deliver them back to the shop and wait for the money return.
Research question and limits
This research will aim to study the reasons for consumers clothing shopping online. To limit the study to be more specific, it will consider two main questions; what attracts consumers to online shops, andwhat makes them buy clothing online. To limit the results to be more specific, the study will consider only male consumers aged between 18 and 35.
To get valuable and relevant results a preliminary interview will be made with a person who works at an online shop. Thereafter two interviews will be conducted with potential customers.This limits the data and results to be relevant only at the local market.


Method
In order to gather data a preliminary interview will be conducted with a person who has knowledge of online shops. Thereafter the data will be analyzed and key issues are pointed out in order to be able create more specific questions for two additional interviews with potential customers. The preliminary interview will be totally open, where the respondent has a chance to tell all about online shops and their customers. The two other interviews are semi-open, where the questions are based on the results of the preliminary interview.
The data will be later analyzed and compared with the theoretical framework. The theoretical framework will be built according to earlier research about online shopping.
Theoretical framework
The theoretical framework will be built under this subtitle. It will be based on earlier studies and literature about consumer online shopping.
Online shopping
Theory about consumer behavior online
Data gathering
The data will be gathered from interviews. First a preliminary interview will be made to confirm the relevance of the theoretical framework. The preliminary interview will be conducted as an open interview, where my co-worker tells about aspects, which attract consumers and get them buy online. It works also as a test if there are additional aspects that were not included in the theory.
More about the preliminary interview and the method
After the preliminary interview two additional interviews are conducted with potential customers within the target group. Due to lack of time, the data gathering will be a bit shallow and won’t consider that large of a population. To get more data, one could conduct a quantitative study. However, the analysis would take more time and would not be relevant for the amount of work needed to conduct this specific study. A laptop will be available if the respondents have problems describing the details that they feel are valuable.
More about the interviews and the method…
Interviews
The preliminary interview will be made with Emilia Lindfors. Lindfors is the other person who founded an online shop with me. She is 23 years old and studies the fourth year at Svenska Handelshögskolan.
The two other interviews will be made with two potential customers, as earlier mentioned. The other respondent will be my brother, Alex Tötterman. Tötterman is 21 years old and studies business at Arcada. The other respondent will be Daniel Remy. Remy is an old friend who is close to end his studies at Hanken.
Analysis of the data
After the preliminary interview the data will be compared with the theoretical framework. With this I will confirm that the theoretical framework is relevant. Also new aspects can be considered if there are any.
After the whole data has been gathered, it will be analyzed. The results will be thereafter compared to the theoretical framework. If there are similarities with the framework, they will be pointed out.
More about analysis

Discussion

Conclustion

Further research

