Are Finnish CEOs overpaid?

1. Introduction

The discussion around widening income gaps has been ongoing for ages but especially in recent years it has become an even bigger issue for many people. Without a doubt one of the reasons behind the widely spread discussion is the enormous salaries of some executive directors, and of course other people earning hundreds of thousands or up to several millions as salary and bonuses. The still ongoing financial crisis has escalated the top management remuneration discussion for several years already. 
The current financial crisis blew up in 2007 when the CDO market in the US started to decelerate. That is only six years after we witnessed the collapse of Enron. In some sense the problem with these two cases is the same, the generous remuneration packages presented for CEOs and other key persons drove people to take huge short sighted risks. Since Enron bankruptcy the remuneration practices have been developing to a direction where the managers’ remuneration is increasingly tide to a long term performance of the company. This is definitely an improvement in the system but it still has its flaws.
During the beginning of year 2012 we have had two peculiar corporate governance-cases in Finland where state-owned companies have been involved in. The first one was a mortgage deal made between the CEO of Finnair, Mika Vehviläinen and the pension fund Ilmarinen and the second one was the remuneration of the CEO of Stora Enso, JoukoKarvinen. Vehviläinen is a member in the supervisory board of Ilmarinen and then again the CEO of Ilmarinen, HarriSailas is the cahirman in the board of directors in Finnair. The outcome of this was that 23.2.2012 Vehviläinen announced that he will not continue as a member of thesupervisory board of Ilmarinen. This case is a good example of the problem that the Finnish business sector have concerning the top management and boards of directors. In my opinion the problem is that top management persons in Finland are so few that the ones that exist are monitoring each other on operational management posts and boards of directors. The discussion in Finland is two-parted, on the one hand we have regular publicly listed companies that pay big compensation to a small group of employees and on the other hand we have state owned companies, which are also publicly listed, that pay maybe even bigger compensation to their executives and other key employees. Despite the split up between state-owned and private owned companies the problem for these two types is the same.
The second case of doubtful CEO remuneration came out on Tuesday 21.2.2012 where HelsinginSanomat wrote that the CEO of Stora Enso, JoukoKarvinen had an increase in his salary of 132% in year 2011.HelsinginSanomat calculated that Karvinen’s earnings were the same as the salary of 42 highly experienced paper machine workers. His earnings were approximately 1 million euros and he got a bonus that was almost 2 million euros. At the same time the company’s net profit (before extraordinary items) shrunk 56% from 769,3 million euros to 342,2 million euros. With these figures one has to wonder ifKarvinen and other CEOs are overpaid. On top of the fuzz caused of Karvinens’ big remuneration in year 2011 HelsinginSanomat pointed out on Wednesday 22.2.2012 that the State of Finland is one the largest shareholder in Stora Enso through Solidium and KELA (The Social Insurance Institution of Finland). The problem is that Stora Enso has given Karvinen a higher performance bonus than what is the state-owners’ instruction. According to the Cabinet Committee on Economic Policy, the maximum level of annual performance bonuses in state-owned companies is 40% of the annual basic salary but Stora Enso paid Karvinen 60%. Stora Enso did not however break their own rules, which give them the right to pay the CEO 70% performance bonus.

1.1 Aim of the study

My purpose in this paper is to make an assessment if the CEOs of Finnish publicly listed companies are overpaid or not.My main point of view will not be the same as Kaplan had in his study done 2008 “Are U.S. CEOs overpaid?”.Kaplan discussed mainly around the topic if U.S. CEOs are overpaid compared to CEOs in other countries.My intention is to evaluate if one person is that valuable to a company or not. The measurement of one persons’ value is difficult to measure as it has to be done as a qualitative analysis instead of a quantitative analysis.

1.2 Limitations

Due to time limitations I will have focus on Finnish publicly listed companies that are currently in the OMX Helsinki 25 index. The index includes 25 most traded stocks in OMX Helsinki. The companies studied in this paper are listed in Table 1. I have also excluded Nordea Bank and TeliaSonera from the empirical part because of them being located abroad. The earnings of the CEOs of these two companies were not available for the whole research period.

1.3 Structure of the study

I will begin with the theory closely related to the topic. This includes basic theory around corporate governance, some special features with state-owned companies, the purpose of the board of directors and some things related to these. 
After the theory I will make some comparison between the CEO salaries and the performance of the company in question. This gives a good insight regarding the correlation between the CEO salary and the performance of the company, do they go hand in hand or can there be seen some skew towards some direction. In other words this gives a good picture if the CEOs salary follows the performance of the company. After this I will try to evaluate the input of a certain CEO for a company.

1.4 Problems with the study

The study has some big problems that might affect the results of the empirical part of the study. The first and biggest problem is the valuation of a CEO to a company. Usually the work of a CEO does not include tasks that can be valued quantitatively but the tasks use to be qualitatively measurable.YrjöKopra, the CEO of Alexander Corporate Finance, a company which plans remuneration programs, says that the added value that a certain CEO brings to a company can probably not ever be measured with scientific accuracy.
The second problem is the access to CEO salaries and remuneration packages. The remuneration packages are relatively complex and thus the valuation and sorting out of these can be difficult. The complexity and the fact that the packages are based on long-term performance lead also to a problem in comparing the CEO salary and the company performance each year. The long-term CEO remuneration leads to that payments related to a certain year are realized in another year which again makes the comparison between CEO remuneration and company performance difficult.
The limitation of studied companies can also skew the empirical results because the studied companies are among the biggest in the OMX Helsinki exchange. The payoff for CEOs in OMX Helsinki 25 companies is probably on average higher than for all CEOs in OMX Helsinki companies. Despite this I think the empirical part is at least indicative for all companies in OMX Helsinki.

2 Corporate Governance in Finland

The good corporate governance in Finland consists of three main factors, the Finnish legislation, remarkable EU directives and the Finnish Corporate Governance Code 2010. The central legislations for listed companies in Finland are the Companies Act, the Security Markets Act, the Auditing Act and the Accounting Act. The most noticeable EU directives are the fourth company law directive and the directive on shareholders rights.
As I call it, the Finnish corporate governance problem. As shortly described in the introduction, the Finnish business society is so small that the top management is supervising each other in different companies. This is a problem that has been recognized for almost a hundred years ago. In the beginning of 20th century companies grew in scale, became more diverse and spread geographically, so did their public shareholders. It was not feasible for the large number of shareholders, located around the country and sometimes around the world, to influence decisions on directors’ appointment or re-appointment. The directors of major listed companies were now being chosen by the existing directors, particularly the executive directors, and routinely approved by shareholders in their annual general meeting. Critics complained that boards can become self-perpetuating clubs of like-minded people, routinely chosen from small networks of influence. This problem was widely noticed all over the world, in the US, UK and France. 
Unfortunately this is the present state in Finland despite globalization and the foreign owners of Finnish listed companies. Some critics of the system in Finland have demanded for more foreign members in the boards. This would be an easy and efficient way to broaden the member base in the boards of Finnish companies. Among others a member of parliament, Ben Zyskowicz has criticized the situation in Finland. He has said that the salaries of CEOs are rising because there are friends improving each other remuneration packages.

2.1 The Finnish corporate governance code

The first corporate governance recommendation was issued in 1997 by the Central Chamber of Commerce of Finland and the then Confederation of Finnish Industry and Employers (nowadays the Confederation of Finnish Industries EK). In the beginning of 2003 the significance and international development of the Corporate Governance practices grew and led to that a working group was established for amending the recommendations. Therefore a new recommendation was published in December 2003. The recommendation issued in 2003 worked well and it met the high international standards but as the regulation changed and the markets developed was it again time to update the recommendation.
The Board of the Securities Market Association appointed a working group to review the recommendation and a new version was approved in October 2008. Once again in 2009 a working group was established to prepare self-regulation in relation to remuneration of listed companies directors due to international development of directors’ remuneration. The Securities Markets Association approved the Finnish Corporate Governance Code 2010 as the latest version of the recommendation in June 2010.
The state-owned companies are not following the Finnish Corporate Governance Code 2010 but the owner control has been centralized to the Owner Control Department of the chancellery of Council of State in 2007. the state’s procedure for nominating the board member candidates has been cleared in the Ministerial Committee for Economic Policy’s statement Nominating the Board Member Candidates of state-owned companies and associated companies (17.2.2004).

3 Organizational design

From a corporate governance perspective the corporate architecture can be divided in three key elements:
The assignment of decision-making authority
Performance evaluation
Compensation structure
These three main points are devised and concluded by the owners, boards of directors and board committees. The owners assign the decision-making authorities and the board and the committees build up the remuneration structure and evaluate the performance. In the next part the above mentioned groups are shortly presented.

3.1 Shareholders

Shareholders invest in the company and thus they are a vital part of a company’s funding. Monitoring shareholder rights is one of the essential reasons why corporate governance has evolved to the form it nowadays is in. The current premier business mantra is maximizing shareholder value and thus the role of shareholder rights has become more crucial. 

3.2 Board of directors

The Board of Directors is responsible for the administration and the proper organization of the operations of the company. The board also supervises and controls the operative management of the company, appoints and dismisses the managing director, approves the strategic goals and the principles of risk management for the company and ensures the proper operation of the management system. According to good corporate governance, the board also ensures that the company has duly endorsed the corporate values applied to its operations. The duty of the board is to promote the best interest of the company and all its shareholders. The boards of directors have a legal responsibility to make decisions on behalf of shareholders and to adopt performance measures and compensation plans that provide managers with cost-effective incentives to maximize current and future cash flows.
The general meeting of the company shall elect the directors in the board. By electing the directors, the shareholders contribute to the administration of the company, and thereby to the operations of the entire company, directly and efficiently. This statement works in theory but the reality is something else. 
The boards of Finnish listed companies usually consist of non-executive directors but there can be found some exceptions. For example two of the OMX Helsinki 25 companies have their CEOs also as members of the Board of Directors, these are JussiPesonen in UPM-Kymmene and Kim Gran in NokianRenkaat. 

3.2.1 Board Committees

In recent years the corporate governance has gone through an important development phase in form of formalization of board committees. The three principal committees are the audit committee, the remuneration committee and the nominating committee. These committees have been established for specific purposes. Each of these committees focus’ on essential parts of the company in question but despite that there are the same members making the decisions. The indisputable benefit of these committees is that by using them, the board is able to focus the knowhow of members to matters that they are specialized in. According to the recommendation of the Finnish Corporate Governance Code 2010 each committee should have at least three members and the members of the committee shall have expertise and experience required by the duties of the committee. This recommendation ensures that all of the committees have skilled and talented members making the decisions. In the light of this information should there be no question concerning the remuneration of CEOs in Finnish listed companies.



3.3 Operational Management

The operational management consists of people who are in charge of the business day to day activity and the Chief Executive Officer is the highest ranked manager in the whole company. The operational management is managed and supervised by the board of directors. 

4 Remuneration of the operational management

Remuneration of CEOs and other executive managers is the essential part of this study. There are as many remuneration packages as there are companies, and thus a generalization of the packages would not be fair. Despite different versions of remuneration can there be pointed out consistent parts in most of them. The basic remuneration of a CEO includes a basic salary, fees, pension arrangements, golden parachutes, options to acquire shares in the company and some other benefits as travel costs, use of company jets, memberships of clubs, housing costs, etc. Due to the nature of the matters that the remuneration committee deals with, neither the managing director nor executive directors may be members of the committee.
A central observation in the study made by Steven N. Kaplan was that the remuneration of CEOs in the US. is mainly a result of a functioning market rather than overpayment. While CEO pay has increased substantially since the early 1990s, the pay of other talented and fortunate groups has increased by at least as much. The increase in hedge fund, private equity and venture capital investor fees have translated into very high pay for those groups. By one estimate, the top 20 hedge fund managers earned more in 2005 than all 500 CEOs in the S&P500. This is most definitely true but the comparison group could be better. The fact that the US and world economy went through a huge rally in between 2002 and 2007 led to the salaries rose indiscreet. Especially hedge funds were the ones to take advantage of the situation at that time. The sub-prime bubble growth in the US probably peaked around 2005 and at the same time investment banks were printing and selling CDOs as much as they could. Kaplans’ suggestion that the high remuneration of CEOs is an outcome of a functioning market is probably also true, but the main question is if the market has right or not? The argument is especially current in Finland at the moment. The Ilmarinen / Finnair case shortly presented in the beginning led to several other similar discussions in other firms. This cross-management in Finnish listed companies lead to that the market might be distorted in the sense of management remuneration. In a way, the CEO remuneration situation in Finland could be described as a cartel where the top management of listed companies is involved in. 
 A recent article published in Corporate Governance: An International Review discusses critically the executive remuneration design process in 23 Finnish state-owned companies. The authors’ findings show that restrictive remuneration guidelines can be ineffective and lead to standardized pay designs without providing comparative advantage. Shareholders should request greater transparency concerning remuneration design. The role of consultants should be considered proactively in the guidelines, even by limiting the length of the consultant-client relationship or increasing their transparency.In the same article the authors brought up the problem in using consultants in CEO remuneration design process and benchmarking CEO remuneration. In Finland, the usage of consultants and benchmarking (for state-owned companies) is closely related as the market is highly concentrated. International benchmarking of CEO remuneration should be carried out extremely deliberately. Only comparing CEO remuneration is not enough, there should also be taken into account cultural, organizational, geographical and historical differences. 
Another central piece in CEO remuneration packages is the golden parachute which is a widely used practice as a part of CEO remuneration. This goes for most of the OMX Helsinki 25 companies that are studied in this paper. According to a study made by Talouselämä in 2010, there is building a practice where the CEO gets a 12 or 18 month salary in case the CEO is fired. On top of this most of the CEOs are entitled to 6 month salary in case they get fired. Some CEOs have managed to negotiate a golden parachute that includes 24 month salary in case of being fired. This kind of golden parachute practice combined with high performance related bonuses should be critically discussed. The incentive to take big, short sighted risks becomes even higher because the golden parachute works as a safety net incase the risk taking misfires.

5 Agency problem

The simple form of the agency problem is whenever the owner of wealth contracts with someone else to manage his or her affairs. At this point the owner has to deliberate if the agent can and will manage the wealth solely in the interest of the owner. The agency problem has existed for ages:
“The directors of companies, being managers of other people’s money, cannot be expected to watch over it with the same vigilance with which they watch their own” (Smith 1776)
How to ensure that the agent acts solely in the interest of the owner is the challenge. At the moment in Finland the problem has been widely solved with an arrangement such that a major part of board seats are occupied by managers from other major corporations. This arrangement goes especially between the large Finnish pension funds as Ilmarinen and Varma and the companies that they are majority shareholders in. From a certain perspective does it seem reasonable that the majority shareholders are so to say monitoring their investments by sitting in the boards of the companies they have invested in. The problem in Finland is the cross ownership within these firms. The agency problem arises as the board of directors might be deciding the remuneration package of a close friend or in the worst case the chairman of the board in the company where one works as CEO in. This kind of situations opens the door for making decisions that are not the best possible for maximizing shareholder wealth.
There is evidence that the independence of boards might be only virtual and there actually can be found solidarity amongst decision makers. This evidence goes for Finnish state-owned companies but there is no reason to see the case would be different for private-owned companies. All the boards of Finnish listed state-owned companies are chaired and dominated by current or former executives of other companies. Thus, the boards may be formally independent from the executives of the respective company, though the mindset is in most cases aligned with its executives.
The criticism against the Finnish system is quite heavy and reflecting to Kopras’ statement it is also appropriate. Kopra says that the concentration of the consultancy business for state-owned companies is good because otherwise, with a wide spread consultancy market none of the actors would have reliable market data on remuneration matters. Despite Kopras statement the reliability of the market data remains questionable if it is based on one actors review on a market where he is the only actor. The use of consultants in designing CEO remuneration is criticized elsewhere. The use of consultants can be explained within the optimal contracting framework on grounds that they supply useful information and contribute expertise on the design of compensation packages. But although compensation consultants might play a useful role, they also can help in camouflaging rents. The incentives of compensation consultants – and the evidence regarding their use – suggest that these consultants are often used to justify executive pay rather than optimize it.

6 Data

The data set in this study is limited to 25 companies which all are included in the OMX Helsinki 25 index. The OMX 25 index is suitable for the purpose of this study, as it includes both private and state-owned companies. State-owned companies do get special attention from the public and therefore is it even more vital that the CEO remuneration isn’t doubtful in these companies.
The data has been collected from Bloomberg, HS.fi, company websites and annual reports. The CEO earnings have been collected through HS.fi website and company annual reports. In some cases the problem is that there cannot be distinguished where the earnings are paid from. Despite this problem I will assume that a major part of the CEOs income comes from the CEO remuneration package they are given from the company they work for. 
The unconventional situation on the financial markets has increased the volatility on the stock market during the period the study focus on. This could be seen in company performance figures through huge changes in net profits. On the other hand it could also have been affecting CEO remuneration through dismissals and changes in CEOs. To prevent skew caused by these extreme values in the percentage changes in either CEO remuneration or in company net profits the data set has been adjusted. The maximum and minimum values have been removed for each year. 
The data set is between years 2006 and 2011. Approximately half of the period is stressed by the financial crisis that burst in the end of 2008 with the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy. Despite this I don’t think it has a too large effect on my results for the empirical study. 

7 Results

The empirical part of the study was carried out by using simple statistical measures. The comparison is made by using average and median of each of the measured figures. The measures that were taken into the study are the nominal values of CEO remuneration and the net profits (before extraordinary items) for the companies in question, and the percentage change in both of the measures. I also used the performance of the OMX Helsinki 25 – index to compare it with the companies’ performance.
As can be seen in Figure 1 the percentage change in companies’ net profits goes hand in hand with the index. This is obvious because the studied companies build up the index. Differences can be seen, especially in 2009 but this can be explained with the fact that company profits are based on the current situation and the stock index price reflect the future expectations.There is definitely a lead-lag relation between these two measures and that causes the difference in the performance. This study will not respond to the question if the stock market is right or wrong with the future predictions. 
The comparison between changes in CEO remuneration and company performance is the essential part of this study. Figure 2 shows how these two measures compare to each other. From the results can be seen that these measures go hand in hand what come to the direction. In approximately 60% of the companies showed a change of CEO remuneration in the same direction as the change in company performance. 
Despite the direction in the change was the same, the proportion of the changes was not parallel. In 65% of the cases the CEO remuneration fell less, or rose more than the company net profit. To some extent can this result be affected by the fact that a large part of CEO bonuses are often paid afterwards as bonuses (and option plans etc.). This causes an effect where the CEO remuneration can be disproportionally high compared to the performance of the company. In this case the problem can be stated to be a minor one based on the fact that during the research period the CEO remuneration held relatively stable.
The average CEO remuneration for the period between 2007-2011 was 1.640.000 euros for the studied companies. As can be seen in Figure 3, exceptionally in year 2007 the median remuneration was higher than the average. Otherwise the remuneration seems stable despite the relatively high overall level. 

8 Conclusions

The assessment of how valuable a person is for a company is difficult, especially when one is trying to evaluate qualitative factors. Based on the results from the comparisons made in this study I would say that the CEO remuneration and company performance does not go hand in hand. A positive surprise in the results was the fact that, at least on average, the direction of CEO remuneration follows the performance of the company. By studying the CEO remuneration and company performance figures on company level, there could be seen several exceptions to this perception.
The results show that the CEO remuneration follows to some extent the company performance but is the absolute level too high? Based on the results from this study and the CEO remuneration practices is my conclusion that the CEOs are overpaid. The question is complex because there are several things to take under consideration when making an assessment on the matter. The basic salary of CEOs in Finnish listed companies is on an absolute level which ensures the CEO a decent payoff disregarding the company performance. I often hear and read about the downside risk for the CEO but I don’t think there is a downside. If the company succeeds, the CEO gets big bonuses and if the company doesn’t perform the CEO gets a relatively high basic salary, which is enough to cover regular expenses. The worst case scenario is that the CEO gets fired, but then he/she usually has a deal where he/she gets 12-24 month salary. If the CEO is not competent the dismissal could turn into the worst case scenario for the company. 
The currently used long-term bonus packages have both pros and cons. The main advantage of these packages is that they commit the CEO for a longer time-period in the company. Then again the downside is the, usually unlimited upside especially associated in option-plans. An increase in the basic salary would prevent the problem associated with abnormal bonuses but then again it would raise the discussion of too high remuneration when the company performs badly. Especially the state ownership control should monitor closely the remuneration of CEOs and they should be ready to make decisions when needed. 

