Family ownership and firm performance: Performance of family firms on the Helsinki Stock Exchange

1. Introduction
Recent research finds evidence that family ownership and control is common in publicly traded firms around the world (Burkart et al., 2003). Interestingly, several studies have reported evidence of family firms outperforming their counterpart non-family firms. In Western Europe, Maury (2006) reports evidence of family firms having higher valuations and profitability than non-family firms. Studies in the U.S. have found similar results (McConaughy, 1998; Anderson and Reeb, 2003).
	Why do family firms perform better? One of the strongest arguments for family ownership is that family control can reduce the classical agency problems between owners and managers (Fama and Jensen, 1983). Long-term commitment, ability to monitor and well-established reputations and relations with stakeholders are often referred to as the primary advantages of family ownership. Inevitably, there are also potential disadvantages associated with a controlling family owner. Concentrated ownerships can cause conflicts of interest between minority shareholders and the controlling family (e.g. Shleifer and Vishny, 1997). Faccio et al. (2001) find that in East Asia, where shareholder protection is low, this may be the case. The possibility of entrenchment, such as inferior management and value-reducing investment decisions, can greatly harm minority shareholders.
	Family ownership is a common phenomenon on the Helsinki Stock Exchange. However, one cannot extrapolate the results of international studies per se on the Finnish conditions. Due to the significant role of family firms in the Finnish economy, more in-depth understanding of the subject is needed. This study examines the share price development – a measure of firm value – in order to grasp the question of family firm performance. Also the volatility (measured by standard deviation) of share price performance and dividend yields will be studied. Hence, the study contributes to knowledge of family firm performance in the Finnish conditions.
1.1 Goal of the study
The aim off the paper is to compare the performance of family firms against non-family firms on the Helsinki Stock Exchange.
1.2 Limitations
The empirical part is based on the currently listed firms on the Helsinki Stock Exchange (January, 2010). The dataset is a panel of 125 firms from 2003-2007, restricted to non-financial firms only. The performance measure is based on stock market performance (returns and volatility) and dividend yields. Further conditions will be discussed in section 3.3 Data.
2. Theory
Family ownership is a common phenomenon around the world. In Finland, approximately 20 percent of the 500 largest companies are defined as family firms (Finnish Family Firms Association); and there are over 30 publicly traded family firms on the Helsinki Stock Exchange. In this chapter the definition of a family firm, potential advantages and disadvantages of family ownership and academic findings regarding the performance of family firms in comparison to non-family firms will be presented.
2.1 Defining family firms
The definition of a family firm is a crucial part of the study. In previous studies a wide variety of definitions have been used. Miller et al. (2007) reviewed the definitions that have been used in finance and management journals, and found 28 different definitions for the time period 1996 to 2006. Miller et al. (2007) also found the results regarding family firm performance to be dependent on the definition used. 
This paper uses a definition similar to the one used by Anderson and Reeb (2003) and Villalong and Amit (2006). In general, the authors define a family company as a firm where the founder or a member of the founder’s family is a blockholder. Furthermore, Villalong and Amit’s (2006) impose an additional restriction requiring a more than 20 % ownership stake for the family.
A family firm is defined according to the criteria used by the Finnish Family Firms Association:
1. A natural person, or his / her wife / husband, or his / her other relative owns the majority of the voting rights.
2. The majority of the voting rights can be direct or indirect voting rights.
3. The presence of at least one family member, a relative or his / her
authorized representative on the board of directors or management of the
firm.
4. In a listed company a family, a member of the family or relative owns 25 percent of the voting rights. Indirect voting rights have to be over family control.

The fourth condition is especially relevant, since this paper focuses entirely on publicly traded firms. Since ownership in Finland (and Europe in general) tends to be dispersed, this entails that the largest owners can exercise control with a relatively small ownership stake. 
2.2 Advantages of family ownership
An often presented advantage of family control is a long-term focus and investment perspective. Several studies report evidence supporting the notion. Anderson and Reeb (2003) find the average holding period to be 79 years for family firms in their sample. Due to a long-term investment perspective family firms are less likely to forgo long-term investment opportunities in order to meet short-term earnings (McVey and Draho, 2005). Furthermore, longer investment perspectives have been found to decrease managerial myopia (Stein, 1988, 1989). Finally, since family firms have the incentive to pass along the wealth of a company to the next generation, several studies report family firms investing more efficiently than their counterparts (Casson, 1999; James, 1999). 
A result of long-term presence in a market is the opportunity to develop a strong reputation towards customers, suppliers and capital providers. Indeed, Anderson, Mansi and Reeb (2003) find that family companies have access to external financing at a lower cost in comparison to non-family firms. However, Ellul et al. (2005) find this to be the case only in countries with good shareholder protection. 
Family owners – like any concentrated owner – tend to have a greater incentive to monitor the management (Demsetz and Lehn, 1985). This is consistent with the notion presented by Fama and Jensen (1983) that family control reduces the classical agency problem between managers and owners. Other possible benefits of family ownership that have been presented in studies are a stronger culture steaming from family values and a high unity of goals among shareholders (see e.g. McVey and Draho, 2005).   
2.3 Disadvantages of family ownership
There are several potential drawbacks associated with substantial family ownership. As with any controlling shareholder, there is the possibility that the controlling shareholder pursue own interests at the cost of the minority shareholders (Fama and Jensen, 1985). This can translate into substituting value maximizing to empire building, growth or firm survival. Indeed, Anderson and Reeb (2003) found that the average family had a substantial part (over 69%) of its wealth tied to the company. Hence, the possibility that risk aversion and value preservation, instead of value maximizing, might become objectives for the management is plausible. 
Several authors take the analysis a step further: Schleifer and Vishny (1987) present the notion of the controlling shareholder seeking to extract private benefits from the company. In practice, this expropriation can be realized through special dividends, inordinate compensation or related-party transactions (DeAngelo and DeAngelo, 2000). In a study on East Asia Faccio et al. (2000) found that in countries with low shareholder protection family control was associated with wealth expropriation of minority shareholders. 
One of the most substantial drawbacks of family control is the possibility for entrenchment (e.g. McVay and Draho, 2005). This includes nepotism, reserving senior management positions for family members and excessive use of private benefits at the company’s expense. Gomez-Meija, Nunez-Nickel and Gutierrrez (2001) found that reserving management positions to family members lead to a competitive disadvantage for family firms. In one study, Villalong and Amit (2006) reported that family ownership is advantageous for shareholders when the founder works as the chairman of CEO of the company (however, when a descendant takes over value is destroyed).    
There are a few other potential disadvantages of family firms worth mentioning. The transition from one generation to the next and succession planning can cause firm value to evaporate. Furthermore, an overlap of family and business issues can be harmful for shareholders.     
2.4 Literature review: Performance of family firms
Family firm performance has been a broadly studied phenomenon during the last decades. However, the conclusions drawn by scholars have not been unanimous. A review of some of the most prominent studies will be included.
Several recent studies indicate that family firms are outperforming significantly their counterparts. Anderson and Reed (2003) focus on the S&P 500 over the time period from 1992 to 1999, finding significant differences in the performance patterns between family and non-family firms. Family firms are found to have higher profitability (and valuations).  In another study, with a slightly different definition of family firms than Anderson and Reeb (2003), McVey and Draho (2005) find similar results. For the time period ranging from 2000 to 2005 the authors report family firms outperforming the S&P index by 4,4% in one year, 19,6% in three years and 109,7% in 5 years. In addition, a study completed by Thompson Financial for Newsweek (2005) reports strong evidence in favor of strong family firm performance. Comparing the performance on the six major indexes in Europe, family firms were found outperforming their counterparts on every stock exchange. In a study focusing on Western Europe Maury (2006) finds evidence of family firms with active ownership outperforming (based on Tobin’s Q and ROA) non-family firms. However, firms with passive family control didn’t outperform their counterparts. 
In one paper Jaskiewicz and Klein (2005) present the overall results from 55 articles regarding family business performance (over 75 percent of the studies were conducted after the millennium). Out of the studies, 14 focus on non-public firms and 41 on publicly traded firms. Interestingly, in 46 percent of the studies family firms outperformed their counterpart non-family firms (performance is mostly based on Tobin’s Q or total stock market returns; when measures focusing on operative performance (such as ROA) are used, no significant difference was observed in the majority of the studies). However, only in 8% of the studies were family firms found.  20% of the studies found no significant difference between the performance of family and non-family firms was found.  
2.5 Performance and risk measures 
Previous research has used different indicators to measure financial performance. Most commonly, operational accounting based measures (such as ROA or ROE), or market driven indicators (such as Tobin’s Q or stock market performance) have been used. Tobin’s Q is a ratio which relates the market value of a firm to the replacement cost of its assets. Since the measure doesn’t directly asses the actual returns of a stock (Miller et al. 2007), this paper focuses on the stock market performance. Hence, the performance measure used is similar to the ones used by Anderson and Reeb (2003) and McVey and Draho (2005).   
In addition to the stock market performance on family firms, the paper also investigates the volatilities (measured by standard deviation) of share price performance. If there are differences in the performance patterns between the two groups, incorporating a risk measure sheds light on the subject; higher returns might be a function of significantly higher risks (here measured by volatilities). I a study by Sraer and Thesmar (2007) the authors found that family firms are less volatile than non-family firms. 
2.6 Dividend yields
Dividend yields play a visible role in financial theory. In a corporate governance context, agency models of dividends focus on exploring the relationship between agency problems and the company’s dividend policy. La Porta et al. (2000b) find two classes of agency models of dividends: models that view dividends as the outcome of agency problems and models considering dividends as a substitute for agency problems.
Overall evidence regarding whether large shareholders affect the dividend policy is mixed. Pérez-González (2003) reports that large individual shareholders establish dividend policies according to their tax preferences. Barclay et al. (2006), on the other hand, find no evidence when comparing dividends for large individual shareholders and large corporate shareholders. As with firm performance, the level on investor protection is a likely determinant of dividend levels.
This paper explores whether differences exist in the dividend yields for family respective non-family firms. Interestingly, McVey and Draho (2005) found that the significantly higher performance level of family firms, measured by stock returns, didn’t translate into higher dividends. Family firms had an average dividend yield of 1,1%, whereas non-family firms had a dividend yield of 1,7% (measured by the S&P 500). The authors conclude that family companies retained the funds for strategic investments. 
3. Empirical part
The empirical part involves comparing the stock market performance and dividend yields of the sample of family firms against the performance of non-family firms. In the paper non-family firms are defined based on a general stock index (OMXH). This approach is consistent with previous studies (e.g. Anderson and Reeb, 2003; and McVey and Draho), despite the fact that the family firms are included in the sample of non-family firms. Furthermore, volatilities of the samples and differences in dividend yields are compared.
The statistical method used for returns is based on testing whether the excess returns (difference in the returns for family and non-family firms) are significantly different from zero using standard t-tests. For volatilities and dividend yields the difference of means tests between the performance indicators of two groups (i.e. standard t-tests) is used.
3.1 Method
The method employed in the paper is based on finding differences in the performance indicators of two groups. The performance indicators used are stock market performance, share price volatility and dividend yields. To find potential patterns of deviating performance, a standard two-sample t-test is used to measure the significance of the results (i.e. if the difference in the results of the two groups is significantly different from zero or if the means between two groups are significantly different from one another). The empirical approach is similar to the one used by McVey and Draho (2005).
3.2 Hypotheses
The research question of family firm performance is further formulated into three statistically tested hypotheses. In line with recent studies (e.g. Anderson and Reeb, 2003; McVey and Draho, 2005), the first hypothesis is built around the notion of family firms outperforming non-family firms:
Hypothesis 1: Publicly traded family firms on the Helsinki Stock Exchange outperform non-family firms
In line with results of a study by Sraer and Thesmar (2007), a hypothesis regarding the volatility of family firms compared to non-family firms is formulated:
Hypothesis 2: Publicly traded family firms on the Helsinki Stock Exchange have lower stock return volatilities than publicly traded nonfamily firms
The last hypothesis assesses potential differences in dividend yields. According McVey and Draho (2005) family-run firms have lower dividend yields than nonfamily-firms on average. Thus a hypothesis regarding dividend yields is constructed:
Hypothesis 3: Publicly traded family firms on the Helsinki Stock Exchange have lower dividend yields than publicly traded nonfamily firms
3.3 Data
The data sample consists of 24 family run companies (according to the definition of the Finnish Family Firms Association) listed on the Helsinki Stock Exchange (OMXH) in January 2011. Furthermore, six companies could be defined as either family or non-family firms, these were excluded from the family firm sample. As a proxy for the performance of non-family firms the OMXH stock index, including all 108 listed companies, was used. Other available indexes, such as the OMXH-25 were excluded due to the limited nature of these indexes. All data was obtained from the Thompson Datastream database.
Data is obtained on a monthly frequency for the time period 2003-2007 for the share price development (both regarding returns and volatility). Daily data was excluded mainly due to potential issues with non-normality (Alexander and Chervany, 1980). The use of longer time frequencies would have been feasible, but would significantly have lowered the number of observations. The performance of the financial variables is measured for 1-, 3- and 5-year periods. 
A somewhat different dataset is used for the dividend yield examinations. Due to the lack of quarterly data on dividend yields, yearly dividend yields are used for a somewhat longer time interval (2000-2010). The sample of non-family firms consists of the 84 companies that data was available for in the Thompson Datastream database. Most companies excluded from the dividend yield sample were either listed or de-listings during the ten year time spectrum used in this part of the study. 
3.4 Descriptive statistics
The results for the various performance measures indicate that, at least on a descriptive level, some deviation in the performance patterns of the two groups could be detected. 
[Table]
The annual returns for family run companies were found to be 12,60%, -18,56% and  -5,65% for the one-, three- and five-year periods. The comparing figures for the Helsinki OMXH stock index, a proxy of non-family firm performance, were 16,15%, -32,35% and -4,65%. Hence, the non-family firms performed better than non-family firms during the one- and five-year time intervals. Nonetheless, based on the level of significance indicated by the t-test – 42%, 34% and 37% – no significant results were found (the significance on a 5 % level were used as a toehold measure). 
The results for volatilities and dividend yields were similar to the ones obtained for share price performance in the sense that no significant differences were found. Monthly volatilities (measured as standard deviations) for family firms were  8.3 %, 6.20 % and 4.6 % compared to 5.6 %, 4.7 % and 3.1 % for the non-family firms. Hence, the volatilities for family firms were higher than for non-family firms during the sample time period. The average dividend yields for family-run companies were 3.18 % and 2.93 % for non family-run companies, with a t-value (level of significance) of 32 %.
3.5 Empirical results
The empirical results don’t indicate that family firms on the Helsinki Stock Exchange were superior performers in comparison to non-family firms, during the 2003-2007 period used in the study. This is contrast to the recent international findings of Anderson and Reeb (2003) and McVay and Draho (2005) that family firms significantly outperform non-family firms. 
There is no clear pattern regarding the performance of family firms and non-family firms; the excess returns of family firms depend on the specific time interval used. For the 3-year interval family firms had an excess return of 13,7%, whereas for the one and three year  intervals family firms performed worse (by -3,6% and -1,0%) then the stock market on average. However, no statistically significant differences in performance could be detected for any of the time periods. Hence, the results don’t support the first hypothesis of stronger family firm performance.
The two other variables used, volatilities and dividend yields, showed similar results as the performance indicators (i.e. no significant results were found). The results on volatilities indicate that publicly listed family firms had higher volatilities than the market in general. This is in contrast with Sraer and Thesmar (2007), who found that family firms are less volatile than non-family firms. However, the sample of family firms is restricted to 24 family companies, which might partially affect the observed results. The observed decreasing volatilities, when moving from the 1 year period to the 5 year period, could reflect the impact of the financial crises. 
The average dividend yields of family firms and non-family firms are nearly the same, being 3,12% for family firms and 2,93% for non-family firms. The figures are somewhat different from McVay and Draho (2005), who found that publicly traded family firms have lower dividend yields (1,1 %) on average than non-family firms (1,7%) in the U.S. Worth noticing is that here the time interval was ten years (2000-2010), based on yearly figures.
3.6 Discussion and conclusion
The paper investigates the performance of family firms compared to non-family firms on the Helsinki Stock Exchange. Based on the share price performance of the two groups, the study finds no evidence of family firms outperforming non-family firms. Interestingly, on a descriptive basis family firms both performed better and worse depending on the time period used. This is in contrast with several recent studies (Anderson and Reeb, 2003; McVey and Draho, 2005), which found evidence of strong family performance. For the two other performance-linked measures volatility and dividend yields no significant results were found.
Despite of this study not finding results supporting the notion of strong family firm performance, it has been well documented in several studies (Anderson and Reeb, 2003; McVey and Draho, 2005). The advantages of having controlling family owner discussed earlier in the paper, such as a longer investment perspective and reduced agency issues between managers and owners, are likely to have a substantial effect on firm performance. Nonetheless, the costs of a controlling shareholder – such as, expropriation of minority shareholders and entrenchment – are also well documented. The overall effect on firm performance of having a controlling family owner is an empirical question – one that this paper aims at answering. 
I order to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the studied phenomenon, a larger sample, longer timeframe and more sophisticated methods could be used. This study on the Finnish market falls into the to the 20% category in the Jaskiewicz and Klein (2005) review, where no significant differences were found between the performance of family and non-family firms.



