The Financial Crisis : How it affected the risk management of financial companies




Introduction
In recent years, we have been following the development of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC),
which struck hard on financial institutions and whole countries. The crisis has affected a large part
of the financial system, increasing regulation, and placing more weight in risk management in
financial institutions. Today, the regulation of risk management in financial companies has been
revised in order to avoid the birth of similar problems in the future.

It is generally accepted that the main reasons for the crisis where: the de-regulated financial
market and inadequate risk management of financial institutions. 1Basel II, implemented in 2007
to 2009, increased the regulation, with Basel III currently being developed to further improve the
current regulation. The Basel regulations change the rules of risk management in financial
institutions, which helps to identify problems in future. All actions are being taken in order to
increase the level of risk management in the financial system.

In previous studies, the political regulation, in fact de-regulation, is blamed for the crisis (Tarr,
2010; Taylor, 2009). The development of complex instruments and new financial innovations has
also been presented to cause the crisis (Acharaya, Philippon, Richardson and Roubini 2009).
Acharaya et al. also claim that the inadequate risk management of banks is one of the main points
that allowed the crisis to grow as large as it did. Many of the previous studies have concentrated
on the question: what caused the crisis? To answer this, studies have discussed why different
institutions acted as they did to motivate their actions.

This paper will provide a contribution to previous studies by examining more closely on the risk
management decision in financial institutions more closely, and how the financial crisis affected
the risk management. As a result, this paper will bring forward how the risk management has
changed due to the GFC and how this affects the operations of banks.

To explain the risk management and the development of it, the paper will concentrate on
examining the informational and incentive problems in financial institutions. As a part of risk
management, especially the market risks of the institutions are especially examined, and how the
risk management of market risk has changed due to the crisis.

The remainder of the paper is divided into five sections; the first section provides an insight into
the risk management of banks and how they differ from other companies; the second section will
explain the market risks of the banks; the third will go through the regulation and how it has
affected the risk management; and the fourth analyses what kind of effect the changes in risk
management will have. The fifth section will be a conclusion and discussion of the findings in the
paper.

Risk management in banks
Risk management in banks has experienced great changes in the latest years due to the financial
crisis. The economy is also under continuous development, and risk management must keep up
with this development, and must therefore go through changes.

To understand what drives the risk management decisions in banks, one must know what affects
the decisions the bank makes to manage risk. Because banks are important financial
intermediaries whose business differs from other industries, they have different features that
drive their risk management. Banks have three important features that affect their risk
management: credit sensitivity of customers, opaqueness and high liquidity, and the highly
competitive market where profits depend on the cost of capital (Merton & Perold, 1998). The
three features are explained more closely in the next section.

Customer credit sensitivity
Banks differ from other companies because their customers are large liability holders. In addition
to investors, also customers have invested in the bank by their deposits. The customers do not
want that the value of their deposits will be depending on the success of the bank, and therefore
safe banks with low risk of default. Because the risk of default is determined by the rating of the
bank, customers seek banks with high ratings. The credit sensitivity of customer leads to a rating
sensitivity of banks.

To minimize the market risk the banks use derivative instruments to hedge themselves against
risk. By effective risk management banks can hedge the market risks they do not want to bear, and
by doing this minimize the risk of default. An important notice is that only known risks can be
hedged, but hedging can´t be used against unknown risks.

Opaqueness and high liquidity
Financial institutions differ from other companies because of their non-transparency. Because
they are non-transparent, the monitoring by shareholders and customers is difficult, and therefore
regulation is needed to keep the customers safe. Moreover, the financial companies have often
high liquidity, which allows them to make changes in their portfolios and risks quickly, before the
market has time to react.

Before the GFC the economy trusted more on self-regulation, and that banks would manage their
risks properly because of their loyalty to the customers and investors. It has though been shown
that this is not the case. Because the market can´t manage the risk because the banks opaqueness,
the task is given to regulators, and supervision of banks is increased. The changes in a bank's risk
management by regulation are discussed in chapter three.

High competition and cost of capital
The third factor arises from the fact that banks sell and buy capital, and at the same time they sell
and buy risks linked to the capital. This is all done in a highly competitive market, where banks
makes profits by the spread between the risks they buy and sell. The level of competition brings
down the profits of banks and their profitability depends on the cost of capital, especially the cost
of risk capital. It is important that banks can borrow cheaply to be able to compete on the market.
Because of the high competition, banks must also have an effective risk management, which costs
can´t exceed profits they can make.


Market Risk
Market risk is defined as the risks in assets, foreign exchange, and interest rates. In a banks
operation it is important to control the risks in market variables. First market risks affecting; asset
prices, foreign exchange and interest rate risk is presented; then liquidity risk and system risk is
discussed because of their linkage to the first three risks.

Asset price risk
Asset price risk is the risk of a decline in asset prices, affecting the banks' balance. The total risk in
asset prices can of course be diversified, but not all the risk can be diversified away. The risk in
asset price decline is counted with a maximal loss on a specified confidence interval within a
specified time horizon. To cover the risk some capital must be reserved.

Foreign Exchange risk
Foreign exchange risk is the risk in value change of a currency, and affects investments made in
other foreign currencies. The risk can be easily hedged with derivative instruments like forwards
and futures, and does not bring additional significant risks to banks.

Interest rate risk
Interest rate risk is the risk of changes in the interest rates, which will affect the banks' profits. The
interest rate risk is more difficult to handle than for example foreign exchange risk, because the
interest rate is affected by many different factors. In addition there are many different interest
rates that is used. Interest rates can be managed within the bank by controlling the contracts
banks do, or with outside partners by interest rate swaps. With todays developed financial tools it
is possible to manage the interest rate so that the net income from the interest rates is held stable
(Hull, 2010)

Liquidity risk
Liquidity risk is not by definition a market risk, but the market risks can lead to liquidity risk. The
risk is that the liquidity disappears from the market, which is serious for the financial sector. If
there is not enough liquidity on the financial sector, the banks cannot continue their task to
distribute money by lending and borrowing. This will eventually shut down the whole financial
system.

The liquidity risk can be protected with increased liquid assets in the banks, that is higher capital
requirements. The risk can be reduced by more transparency in the banks, so that the banks
situation is known by the market and other banks. If the banks were more transparent then some
banks in good shape could continue their operation in difficult times, and banks in bad shape
would probably default.

System risk
The system risk is that a default of one bank will lead to problems in other banks. System risk is an
important factor in the financial sector because the banks risks are highly correlated with each
other. The system risk can start a snowball effect if risks are not managed properly.

Regulation
Regulation of financial companies, especially banks, has become current under the recent years.
Before the GFC there was a belief that the market would regulate itself, but this has proven to be
wrong, and regulation is needed.

Motives to regulate banks
One reason to regulate banks is that the banks have enough capital reserved against the risks they
take. It has been shown the economy suffers from different kind of crisis that also affects banks.
During difficult times bank crashes happen, and they have proven to be difficult or even
impossible to eliminate (Hull, 2010). To minimize the possibility of a bank failure different kind of
regulation has been put on place. The goal of the regulation is to create a stable economy for
individuals and companies.

To build a stable economy and reduce the possibility of a bank failure there is a system that
lessens the motives for risk management in a bank, namely government deposit insurance. The
deposit insurance helps to create a stable economy, as the customer concern of losing money is
decreased. The deposit insurance can also create moral hazard in banks, as the bank knows that
the government secures the depositors. This is the last thing the governments want to achieve,
and therefore deposit insurances are connected to capital requirements.

An important factor of the regulations is the management of system risk. The system risk arise
from the strong correlation between the banks, which leads to the fact that if one banks defaults it
affects other banks. A larger bank has a larger impact on the system, and if a large bank defaults, it
can start a snowball effect taking many other banks to default state. This could finally lead to a
total collapse of the financial system (Hull, 2010). To avoid this situation the governments must
take difficult decisions when a bank is in a risk of failure: to let the bank fail or to save it. If the
banks fails it increases the system risk. If it is saved, it can give a wrong message to the market that
the government will save the banks, and they can increase their risks to get higher profits. The
purpose of the regulation is to kick in before the banks are in risk of failure, which motives the
regulation of banks.

Regulations today ­ Basel II
Today the bank sector is regulated by the Basel regulations made by the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision. The objective of the Basel regulations is to control the risk taking of banks
and increase the supervision of the banking sector. Basel II was implemented in 2007, and the way
it regulates the banking sector is divided in three pillars: 1. capital requirements, 2. supervision
and 3. market discipline. The three pillars is discussed following.

Pillar 1 ­ capital requirements
The pillar one consists of capital requirements to protect the bank against various risks. Capital
requirements differentiates from other risk management techniques because it is a protection
against all types of risk, known and unknown.

Basel II made some changes in the way credit risk is calculated compared to Basel I, and brought a
new risk class: Operational risk. In addition in Basel II it was decided that the credit rating of
companies assets in a banks balance should affect how much capital is required from the bank. In
Basel I the capital requirement was same for an A rated company as for an BB rated, which lead to
more risk taking by banks because they had a larger spread on the BB companies, and wanted as
much of these instead of A companies. The capital requirement for banks is 8 % of their risk-
weighted assets (RWA).

Total capital requirement = 0,08 *(Credit Risk RWA + Market Risk RWA + Operational Risk RWA)

Pillar 2 ­ Supervision
Supervision and regulation was increased and standardized in Basel II. The goal is to take care of
the problems before they arise, and to encourage banks to develop their risk management. As a
part of the pillar 2, stress testing was implemented to the banking sector, in which banks risk
profile and risk management is tested.

Pillar 3 ­ Market Discipline
The third pillar requires the banks to disclose more information how their capital is allocated and
what kind of risks they have. The goal of this is to develop the risk management of the bank, so
that the investors and depositors get to know the real situation of the banks.

Development of Basel II
As noted earlier, the GFC has caused changes in the risk management of financial companies, and
much of the changes come from increased regulation. Basel II is further developed, and in 2013
Basel III is going to take effect. In this chapter, I am going to present the development and changes
in Basel II and present Basel III shortly in the next chapter.

To be better prepared against future crisis, the development of the regulation is made to protect
against the risks that has caused problems in the last years. Under the last crisis liquidity caused
much discussion because almost all liquidity disappeared from the interbank market. This
happened because the banks could not trust other banks because of opaqueness of banks. The
situation was difficult due to different financial innovations and a de-regulated market, but the
main point is that almost all liquidity disappeared. Now regulators have developed instruments to
ensure that banks have enough liquidity, and that the risk management of liquidity crashes is on a
good level.

Another important development factor is the introduction of stress tests to the banking sector.
The stress tests is done to measure the banks' ability to survive future crisis. In the stress tests an
imaginary situations is made up, and then test the banks' ability to survive different scenarios.

A third development to the Basel II is to increase the capital requirement for securitized assets (for
example MBS). This is also an affect from the last crisis, when securitized assets cased problems in
the banks balances.

Two risk management changes for banks
Changes have not only been done to the regulative part, but also to the risk management in the
banks. To improve the risk management two new measures of risk has been implemented:

Incremental Risk Charge (IRC) and stressed VaR. Both of the measures will increase the capital
requirement for banks.

IRC is implemented because the Basel Committee where worried that the banks would shift their
assets from the banking book to the trading book. The change of the assets from the banking to
trading book is possible by securitization and structured products. An example of this is the trading
of real estate mortgages as MBS securities. In normal cases the risk of the assets in the trading
book was accounted had different risk profiles than in the banking book. Now assets from the
banking book was transferred to the trading book, which would mean that a bank can take more
risk because the risk profile of the assets in the banking book were more strict. The Basel
Committee has proposed that structured assets in the trading book should be accounted with the
same risk profile as the products in the banking book. IRC will be implemented during 2011.

Another improvement to the risk management is implementation of a measure called stressed
VaR. In normal risk management VaR is accounted for a period of two to four years. Stressed VaR
is accounted from market variables during one year of losses. This would give the banks a sum of
loss that would not be exceeded (on a 99% chance) even the economy would be in recession. The
Basel Committee have proposed that the market risk of banks is calculated of the sum of VaR and
stressed VaR. These changes will at least double the capital requirement for market risk banks
have (Hull, 2010). Stressed VaR will be implemented in the late 2011.

Basel III
The development of Basel II has gone towards increased regulation, and Basel III makes changes
towards even more regulation and supervision. This papers presentation of Basel III is based on
meeting notes of Nout Wellink, the president of Basel Committee and Banking Supervision, from a
meeting in Malaysia 17 January 2011.

In the notes Wellink presents that Basel III is made to prepare the banks against future crisis. The
globalization and financial innovations puts higher demand on capital requirements, and increased
liquidity must be implemented in the system to protect against unknown, unexpected risks. The
problems that caused the last crisis must be manageable in the future. Wellink brings forward the
main points that caused the crisis which must be protected in the future:

        The primary reason why the GFC began was: excess global liquidity, too high usage of
        leverage, too little good quality capital, and inadequate capital reserved for liquidity
        problems
        The crisis worsened when international financial companies, which were too-big-to-fail,
        decreased their indebtedness (decrease leverage) at the same time. As they all sold their
        assets the prices plummeted.
        Additional reasons for the crisis were inadequate risk management, corporate
        governance, and transparency. There were also wrong incentives in compensation
        systems and bad quality supervision. The risk management and supervision failed because
        the understanding on system risk under recession was not adequate.

To develop and improve the risk management in the future Basel III is going to manage both
company specific risks and market risk on the banking sector. The company specific risks in
handled through rules and regulations, when the market risk in handled on a macro-level that will
give information about the system risk and the connections between banks. Basel III will contain
the following improvements on a company level:

        Increase the quantity and quality on capital requirements
        Implement stressed VaR, which i explained earlier
        Banks must keep more capital for less liquid credit sensitive assets
        Capital requirements for securitized assets will be made consistent with the capital
        requirements in the banking book (higher capital requirements)
        Increase the supervision, risk management and transparency

Improvements on macro level:

        The financial companies should have capital reserved for credit bubbles. This reserved
        capital can be used in a crisis.
        A new, easy to understand ratio, will be established that will put an end to the risk driven
        system we have today
        A tool to handle international liquidity will be created

To summarize Basel III will increase the level of regulation, supervision and raise the capital
requirements. This will have an influence on the whole financial system by affecting banks risk
management.

Analysis ­ How the changes affect banks
All the development and changes in risk management and regulation will affect the operations of
banks. These changes are done so that consumers and companies would have a stable market,
with secure banks. The changes affect different parts of a bank's operations, of which three
important changes will be analysed: increased capital requirements, transparency and supervision,
and developed risk management. Additionally the planned international liquidity tools are
analysed on macro level.

Increased capital requirements
Many points of the development in risk management are done to increase the capital
requirements for banks. This point will be analysed because capital requirements are connected to
the central operations for banks.

How to increase
To increase the amount of capital in their reserves, banks would in theory have a couple choices. If
the capital requirement would be increased immediately, banks would have the choice to sell their
assets and reduce the total assets, and at the same time, the amount of capital would increase.
Another choice would be to keep the old assets, and only raise their spread on money. In practice
banks would have to do the both, which brings us to the problems in future problems in raising
capital requirements.

If one bank would want to sell its assets to increase the capital requirement, it would not be an
problem. The problems start when all the banks do this at the same time. Then there is an
increase in the supply of assets, which pushes the prices of assets down. When the prices fall, so
does also the price of the assets still left in the banks' balance, which the banks want to avoid.

The other choice is to increase the spread; and through this get a larger profit on the money.
Increasing the spread would have an effect on the banks competitive position if other banks would
not do the same at the same time. This, in contrast to asset sales, should be done synchronized by
all banks, because otherwise the competition would make the bank lose its customers. In addition,
this would increase the cost of money on the market, which affects the whole development of the
economy. It is tough a difficult question for regulators, who are looking for the best answer to the
economy.

How the changes affect banks
Interesting in this that the banks must make these changes, and therefore it is important that the
changes are done on a long time horizon. How the changes can affect the operation of banks is
discussed next.

I will start by making a short conclusion on what assets banks must increase capital. Capital
requirements are increased on; credit risk, operational risk, securitized assets, non-liquid assets,
and preparation for difficult times and credit bubbles. Moreover, the capital requirement depends
on the rating of companies banks operate with. By all these regulations and rules banks are forced
to increase their capital, without rules how to do it. The interesting thing with rating based capital
requirements is that one can choose a low risk customer that pays a low spread, or a high-risk
customer that pays a high spread. In the latter case a bank must reserve more capital, that will
decrease their other operations. I think that this will lead to banks searching companies that have
a higher rating than believed, and thus the capital requirement is lower than it should be. The
bank can have this information if a company is a customer of a bank, then the bank has insider
information that rating agencies do not. Therefore, in the end the system can lead to more risk
taking by bank that does not show anywhere.

Transparency and supervision

Developed risk management
   -   : stress testing, IRC, stressed VaR

International liquidity tools


Conclusions
