Social media- an Angel or a Terrorist?


Introduction

I plan to write my end-of-term paper on social media. I will focus on how social media has evolved and developed throughout the years and become a crucial part of everyday life. The aim of my paper is to find out what the most important reasons are for one to use social media; what one sees as the most gratifying experience of using social media. I also plan to discover some of the negative outcomes that Facebook can convey and the risks it can bring to an individual. 

There are many different programs one can use to stay in touch with friends, increase their social life, and share information with coworkers. Examples of these different forums of social media are: Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, Wikipedia and MySpace. Facebook became a hit about exactly eight years ago. It was launched in the United States. It didn’t become popular in Finland until 2007 but now has become a regular networking site for almost everyone. As of January, 2009, Facebook was ranked as the most preferred networking site according to the website ‘compete.com’. Because of Facebook being the most used social media, I plan to focus my study on this networking site above the others.

What social networks are mostly used and why? The consumer has an increasing role for social media through Twitter, Facebook, Youtube, MySpace and Wikipedia. ‘As consumers are increasingly performing activities previously controlled by companies, the entire marketing landscape is changing. Social media, such as social networking sites and user-generated services, have emerged into mass use rather recently, basically from 2003 onward’ (Boyd & Ellison, 2008).  

What are the drivers of this rather recent trend of socialization through media? What drives the desire to use social media? What does the consumer want from using social media? Marketing is a two-way procedure between the customer and company. Consumers nowadays have the power over companies when interacting on the web because consumers react to companies online branding and marketing. The companies have to react to customer’s wishes and feedback. When using Facebook for example, banners and advertisements are seen constantly on the sides of the screen. To a certain extent, consumers usually like this but where is the boundary on what is enough? 

Research Problem 

The purpose of this essay is to find out what benefits and advantages social media brings for an individual. I also plan to research on what negative aspects and risks social media conveys for the society and an individual in particular. How important is social media for every individual and how has the importance of social media changed for the interviewee during the past five years? How has social media altered the workplace atmosphere and what negative affects and security risks are brought forth by the increasing use of social media? What role does the consumer have in social media versus the company?

My study consists of four parts: theoretical background, method of research, empirical analysis and results and managerial implications to discuss the results. In the theoretical framework, I plan to discuss and explain more in detail what the concepts of Facebook and social media are and what they are used for. Also, I plan to explain why the use of social media has increased so rapidly? Why is one media better than the other one? The method of research used for my paper will be a questionnaire and interview. I will conclude my paper with results and managerial implications. 

How has the role of the company as the marketer changed into the role of the marketer being the customer?  The control of information has shifted from marketers to consumers, because the Internet allows consumers to find any information they need very easily (Weber, 2007). The consumer is recently seen to be having the bigger role in contributing to social media by marketing content. In order for both the company and the consumer to benefit from social media, companies need to see social media with eyes of the consumer. 

Social media sites like Twitter and Facebook are seen as useful tools for marketers to communicate. The use of Facebook and other social media at work has become so popular that some companies have even prohibited the use of such sites at work. ‘Whether it involves using employer computers to check personal e-mail and social network pro?les or sending text messages on employer provided communications devices, employee use of boundary-crossing technologies in the workplace for personal purposes is prevalent. Social media, in particular, has permeated modern culture and the daily lives of the incoming workforce.’ (Sanchez Abril, Levin, & Del Riego, 2012). 

The use of these sites in both everyday life and at work derives many legal, ethical and business-related concerns.  ‘Employer intrusion into an employee’s personal life threatens the employee’s freedom, dignity, and privacy—and may lead to discriminatory practices. A considerable body of business research indicates that employer invasiveness may lead to higher levels of employee stress, lower levels of productivity, and worse employee health and morale.’ (Sanchez Abril, Levin, & Del Riego, 2012). 

There are many other ways than those contributing to work that can affect an individual negatively. There are constantly many under aged signing up on Face book who necessarily do not understand the risks of talking to strangers, giving out personal information etc. I recently read an article of a girl being bullied on Facebook which led her to commit suicide, and another girl being raped as a consequence of her updating her status saying where she was at a certain time. These kinds of things should never happen, and they most likely had been avoided without Facebook.




Method

I plan to interview about 30 of my peers, and about 10 adults (people in full-time positions) on their usage of social media I plan to use qualitative methods in deriving results and answers. Qualitative in-depth interviews and a questionnaire ware used to gain information about why one wants to use social media, and if one recognizes in his/her life any negative aspects of social media. My sample was be 40 people, of whom 30 were my peers and 10 adults in full-time positions. I chose my sample randomly by a girl-boy-basis.

Analysis and results 

The answers and results to my interviews and questionnaires were somewhat what I expected. Most people blogged for the social experience, get to know knew people, share their thoughts, influence other people, staying in touch with others and to mingle. There were very few individuals who had ever thought about the negative outcomes of using social media. Most of the ones, who even had acknowledged negative aspects existed, were amongst the 10 adults interviewed. They had thought about these negative aspects because of their young children signing up on Facebook for example. 

Conclusions

After the rapid development of technology, I sit here and wonder on how our grandmas and earlier generations have lived? They do not have a single clue on how the world has changed and how by a few clicks, you can stay in touch with your friend in Africa! The relevance of my study in particular, for the community, is not that high since this subject has been written on a million times. I do see it, however, as an interesting topic to write on and learn from. We use Facebook every day, but do we really know how it evolved, who all uses it, what it can bring forth; the good and the bad? 

I can also see social media as a topic being dwelled upon on its positive effects but I haven’t read many articles on the negative sides and the turnbacks that social media affects people with? I think most people only see Facebook as a good form of media. Do they ever think about the negative outcomes that Facebook brings? Social media has become an excellent tool for some purposes, and a good device for social mingling, but we should always remember to be careful with what we use it for and what kind of information we share. 


Interview design 

All my interviews took place in Helsinki, Finland during March 2012. There were 40 interviews that lasted about 15 minutes each. Most of my interviews and questionnaires were conducted at school but some were conducted at the interviewee’s homes. There were many questions in the beginning about general aspects and thoughts on social media. These ‘easier questions’ were followed by more in-depth questions that required one to think. ‘An interview guide with predetermined topics was used for the interviews because it gives the researcher the freedom to keep the conversational style while interviewing without losing focus’ (Patton, 2002). 

