The reasons behind the current European Sovereign Debt Crisis 
Introduction

The European sovereign debt crisis has been very much discussed lately, both in the politics, in the public and in the media. It is a significant phenomenon which ultimately is going to affect our daily lives to some extent and should be discussed. This research tends to contribute to those researches already made about the crisis, and how it began. I think that the causes of the crisis have not been discussed properly and from an wide enough perspective. There has been a lot of discussion whether the crisis was caused by single countries mismanageing their economy, or if it is a political crisis of the EU and how the Union works. What many people don’t seem to realize, is that the banks, which the memeber countries like Germany and France now desperately are trying to save, in fact have a lot more to do with the crisis in a negative perspective as seen before. The euro also had some signifanct faulties already in it’s creation back in the early 90’s. It is not possible to have a Union with memberstates having a common currency and no common treasury. If a common currency really ought to work, the EU should have a lot more integration than what is the case now, with discussions going on about excluding some countries from the monetary union or even breaking-up the whole EU. Im not going to go into the possible solutions or what needs to be done to save the euro and even the EU from breaking-up, even if I might scratch the surface at some of my explanations of what caused the crisis. This research paper is going to be devided into 3 sections and a conluding last chapter. First I am going to discuss the role of the memeberstates in causing the crisis, secondly I will discuss the banks role and last I will go into the structural problems which have been there since the Euro was introduced in the Maastrich Treaty in 1992. In the last chapter I am going to summarize and make a final conlcusion on the reason behind the Sovereign Debt Crisis.









The membersstates role in causing the Sovereign Debt Crisis

“Greece has one of the most generous, and therefore expensive, state pension systems among the 30 mostly rich OECD countries. Workers look forward to a pension of 96% of pre-retirement earnings.” (‘A Very European Crisis’ The Economist, 4th February 2010)

The common conception of the of the European Sovereign debt crisis today is the inability for certain nations in the European Union, such as Greece, Ireland and even Portugal, to have economies strong enough to do well in a group of nations with free mobility and a common currency, which causes a so called debt cycle and weakens the common currency.
The common conception today is that the crisis started in Greece back in early 2010 and has from there expanded to be a crisis of the whole euro-zone. (’Greece should be responsible, Guardian September 15, 2011) Countries like Greece and Portugal are the weakest economies in the euro area while Ireland has been hit hard by the 2008 financial crisis and is heavily in debt because of that. The difference in what comes to Ireland is that it’s economy got weaker because of a banking crisis, which the European Sovereign Debt Crisis also partly is and is going to be discussed later in this paper. However the problem with Greece and Portugal is that they have some structural problems in their economy such as poor infranstructure and a huge public sector, while Ireland is better off in that manner, having strong ties to the Americas and their investments, a relativly young, well educated population and a good infrastructure for economical growth. That being said Ireland can be seen more as a victim of a single event, in this case the financial crisis back in 2008, and have a brighter future in what comes to economical growth, while Portugal and Greece are going to have to make some significant structural reforms to be able to compete in the global market.
The Greek economy was the fastest growing in the euro zone from 2001 to 2007. With a lot of capital flowing in from foreign investors and low bond yields allowed Greece to run large structural deficits. So basically Greece lived with a lot of debt which was acceptable as long as the industry was doing well. Greece was practically allowed to borrow capital at the same interest rate as Germany which economically is a lot stronger. But when the financial chrisis started back in 2008 Greece’s two largest industries, tourism and shipping, lost one fourth of their revenues. Greece had already been borrowing a lot of money since 2001 but the actual borrowing was hidden in public statements to avoid any conflicts with the EU and the monetary union which had placed restritcions on how much a country should have in debt in relation to it’s public GDP. Greece’s rates were far too high and with the economy not making enough revenues after the 2008 financial crisis hit the EU, Greece was pretty much doomed. The quote in the beginning of this chapter taken from the Economist tells a lot about the Greeks living over their earnings. Apart from the pension system which is one of the most uneffective economically in the whole Europe, Greece has a very big public sector and an unemployment rate that is around 20%. Greece has also bad infrastructure and the future for econimcal growth looks quite dark. Make the matters worse the Greek population is ageing in a rapid phase so there will be a lot of people expected to retire in the up coming years.

However the real roots of the problem go a lot further than what has been said so far, and there is many more factors that have to be taken into consideration when evaluating the cause of the crisis.
“Germany has played to its electorate and looked after its own interests,” said Alan McQuaid, chief economist with Bloxham Stockbrokers.(Who to blame for crisis of leadership, Independent.ie, September 18 2011). As Alan McQuaid states, Germany also has a big footprint in bringing up the European Sovereign Debt Crisis. 
George Soros has been writing a lot of good articles about the European Sovereign Debt Crisis and his view on the problem doesen’t focus on blameing Greece or the other countries who can have been said to mismanage their economy, as can be seen in so many other statements and articles made by different authors and politicians. Contrary, Soros is targeting Germany, the strong economical leader of Europe, for being egoistic and not takeing responsibility in difficult times.
Soros explains that the European Union has been built to guard against inflation and ignore the possibility of deflation. All this because of Germany, which has had too big inflation periods, is strongly against a looser fiscal policy, which would create a little inflation but help the countries in debt since their export would be cheaper, which is exactly what countries like Greece need now in order to get their economy going again.This is also what China constatly keeps doing, downgradeing the value of it’s currency to be able to export more, especially to the US which has a stronger currency.
Soros insist that Germany can be blamed for forcing other countries in the EU to behave in a certain manner and manage their economy in the same way as Germany (no inflation) even though some of the countries would need an economical politics that allows inflation to hit every now and then.
Germany has according to Soros no intensions to help Europe and work for a common good cause, but to maintain its competitiviness and avoiding becoming the ”deep pocket” of the rest of Europe. Soros also says that: ”The most ardent instigators of that attitude would prefer that Germany leave the euro rather than modify its position.”. What he means by this is that if Germany would leave the euro, their own currency, most likely the former Deutsche Mark, would increase in value being a lot stronger than the euro. Germany would still have to face the cold realities of having an overvalued currency, and the German banks would suffer heavy exchange losses and there would be much more unemployment, hence no inflation. (The Crisis & the Euro, George Soros, July 8 2010)
“Merkel, together with the German economic establishment, is responsible for the European debt crisis deepening to the point where the euro could fall apart,” –Simon Tilford, chief economist with the London-based think tank, the Centre for European Reform (CER) (Who to blame for crisis of leadership, Independent.ie, September 18 2011). As Simon Tilford said in an article by Louise McBride on independent.ie, the huge capital flow from Germany and other surplus countries to weaker countries can be seen as a big cause in bringing the European Sovereign Debt Crisis to the point where it is in right now. Germany and Angela Merkel have constantly rejected proposals by the weaker economies in the EU to make actions that would help them boost their economy and get them back on their feet again. In March 2010, she rejected the Irish proposal of negotiating a lower interest rate on the 67,5 billion euros bailout loan it had got earlier from the EU, even though the interest rate of this loan clearly was going to paralyze the Irish economy and it’s taxpayers, only worsening the possibility of Ireland being able to pay back it’s loan. (Who to blame for crisis of leadership, Independent.ie, September 18 2011). The deal of a lower interest rate for Ireland later got approved, alloweing Ireland to save 1 billion euros annual in interestrates, but once again Germany’s unwillingness to co-operate and be flexible caused a lot of time and money, of which both Europe currently has a lack of.

(Who to blame for crisis of leadership, Independent.ie, September 18 2011)
With all this being said, Germany’s selfish politics can also be seen as being a significant contributor to the European Sovereign Debt Crisis.
The German and French banks also have a signicant role in causing this severe debt situation Europe is no faceing which is going to be discussed in the next chapter.

The banks role in causing the financial crisis

The European Sovereign Debt Crisis can also be seen as a bank crisis. For many years countries like Greece, for to which entering the euro meant easier access to international loans and lower rates on the long-term loans, was a very lucrative target for the banks to lend a lot of capital. If you look at it from this perspective: who allowed Greece to be able to put itself so overly in debt? Well, the Greeks themselves of course can be blamed for not takeing the proper responsibility in not living over their limits and takeing so much debt, and besides that even hideing and manipulating the statements about the true Greek debt from the EU, which only allowes countries to have a maximum debt of 60% of it’s public GDP. The banks who lent the money must also have shown some radical miscalculations in lending so much money to Greece, takeing bigger risks and all this for makeing an as big a profit as possible without looking too much at the consequences when the recession hit the world in 2008.
Another issue why the banks also can be seen as guilty of causeing the sovereign debt crisis is that there never was any proper actions made to strenghten the banks after the 2008 subprime crisis which led to Lehmann Brothers liquidation. (The Crisis & the Euro, George Soros, July 8 2010)
So basically the banks were already in a quite bad shape after the 2008 financial crisis and should have been better prepared and more careful for capital loss, like it now seems is the case of Greece which most likely won’t be able to pay back it’s loans. The German and French banks are and have already for a long time been highly leveraged, having a high value of debt compared to their equity (The New York The Euro Zone’s Structural Problem, Simon Johnson Times, June 17, 2011)
“German and French banks carry a combined $119 billion in exposure to Greek borrowers alone and more than $900 billion to Greece and other countries on the euro-zone's vulnerable periphery: Portugal, Ireland and Spain.” (Exposure to Greece Weighs On French, German Banks, The Wall Street Journal, Vanessa Fuhrmans& Sebastian Moffet, February 17, 2010)
As the Wall Street Journal’s article says, particularly the French and German banks have been lending a lot of money to Greece. The same article also states: “Together, France andGermany's banking sectors account for roughly half of all European banks' exposure to those countries. Nearly half of the outstanding debt is with Spain, according to data from the Bank for International Settlements.”.France and Germany are the two countries who are most concerned about Greece not being allowed to declare bankruptcy, which for all the smaller countries and the other countries which banks have not been investing so much risky capital in Greece are now dragged into helping save practically the German and French banks. It can also be stated that France and Germany are the two most influential countries in the EU with Germany having 99 seats in the European parliament and France having the second most, 72 seats, together with United Kingdom and Italy. (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Parliament) Together these two countries are able to make decision in the European Parliament which does not necessarily always be for the best of the European Union as a whole. In fact many of the countries in the EU and EMU would be better of if Greece was allowed to declare bankruptcy and default on it’s loans to these banks, most of course the Greeks themselves. Greece would actual be better of it was allowed to leave the euro and go back to its old currency, the drachma, which then could be devaluated so that Greece could start building it’s economy again by boosting it’s export, instead of having years and years of economical recession and being enslaved by it’s debt. In the state Greece is now, overly in debt and without any possibilities to re-gain economical growth, due to the high value of the euro preventing Greece from being able to export in a way that a lower valued drachma would do. What the EU is no doing, except France and Germany trying to cover their own backs, is basically punishing Greece for bad behavior, which does not lead to anything constructive.(Why Greece Should Reject the Euro, Mark Weisbrot, The New York Times, May 9 2011)


Structural problems with the EU and problems which arose already in the creation of euro


A lot of the solutions the European Parliament is coming up with now are short-term solutions, but a great deal of what caused the European Sovereign Debt Crisis is due to structural problems in the euro-zone and will have to be dealt with to get a good long-term solution and stability. Following I am going to discuss some of the most important structural factors that can be seen as a cause of the crisis, and factors that the Eurozone lacked which could have prevented the crisis from happening.

The euro had many grey areas already from the start and instead of strengthening the ties between countries it now seems to draw them apart. Countries are now blaming each other for the crisis and radical anti-EU movements arise in almost all the euro countries. (How the Euro Became Europe’s Greatest Threat, Spiegel Online 20/06/2011) Problems like these don’t arise when everything is going well and nice, but when troublesome times come the EU leaders are not so united anymore and the egoism of the different countries and their own good can be seen much clearer. 
“The euro was an incomplete currency to start with. In 1992, the Maastricht Treaty established a monetary union without a political union. The euro boasts a common central bank but it lacks a common treasury. It is exactly that sovereign backing that financial markets are now questioning and that is missing from the design. That is why the euro has become the focal point of the current crisis.” – (George Soros, The Crisis & the Euro, July 8 2010)
As George Soros says, the euro area is in a desperate need of a common treasury that would control the interest rates and be able to guarantee loans for the banks in case that something as bad as a country not being able to pay back on it’s loans would occure. Once again Germany has been the one country opposing this reform since Germany is still doing pretty well and actually even benefitting from the Eurozone due to Germany’s export driven economy. As stated before if Germany was to leave the Eurozone their own currency would most likely increase in value to a point that would harm it’s export. If the problems in the euro continue to grow, as they will if Germany is going to continue not to show any kind of willingness to co-operate, even the German economy is going to go down the same road as the rest of Europe. 
The politicians are too scared of admitting the fact that they all know, which is that the Euro was poorly designed from the start, and all this in fear of losing their jobs.(The Euro Zone’s Structural Problem, Simon Johnson, The New York Times, June 17, 2011). This is exactly the problem in Germany right now, with Merkel continuously insisting to keep her promises to the German public about not having a common European treasury. From here we can even draw parallels to the democratic system. The problem with democracy is that politicians are allowed to promise nearly anything in order to get elected, make the decisions if they get elected and basically not having to bear the long-term consequences knowing that there will always be someone who will take their place in the future in the coming elections if things are not going according to plan for them. So basically the politicians do not have any long-term responsibility. In the end the burden of the politicians decisions, which might be good in the short-term but can turn very bad in the long-term as seen now, are for the regular people to take. What Merkel now is trying to do is probably sticking to her promises she made in the last election and rely on the opposition to take the big, yet for Germans uneasy step towards a common treasury.
Another structural problem with the Eurozone apart from not having a common treasury to control the interest rates, which are now skyrocketing for the government bonds of Southern-European and Irish government bonds, is the regional differences in competitiveness. Greece and Portugal apparently do not have strong enough economies to be able to compete with German and Northern-European economies, yet being able to loan at the same interest rate as the Germans and Northern-Europeans. If Portugal and Greece do not make significant structural reforms the Eurozone will forever be a monetary union where capital have to be streamed from the wealthier areas of the Eurozone to the poorer areas. This situation is actually not uncommon in a lot of Federal Unions, mostly the United States, where poorer areas such as Virginia and Louisiana constantly get capital injections from the other wealthier states, of course distributed by the Federal Reserve. The difference however between Europe and United State is that the Americans see themselves more as a country and not as a Federal Union of states. They share the same nationality, same language, same culture and same values, while the Eurozone still lacks a common language, common culture and a common identity. It is understandable that the Finns, the Germans and the Dutch are not to fond of helping countries like Greece and Portugal since it feel very distant for the public, as if helping another country far away instead of just paying for a common good. That is exactly why more integration in the EU towards a Federal State haveto be taken. The public needs to be able to feel more as if EU was a Federal State and not just a Union with different member states. However the step towards this will take a lot of time, mostly because Europe is so diversified when it comes to cultures, values, lifestyles and languages. This augmentation of integration is relevant to the topic of what has been causing the European Sovereign Debt Crisis in the way that if we would have had a more integrated Eurozone, the wealthier countries would have been more willing to help the poorer areas from the start and the crisis would probably not have deepened to the state it is in now.

Summary and conclusion

We began the paper by discussing the role of the different members states and what can be seen as their mistakes in causing the European Sovereign Debt Crisis. We discussed the role of two key actors, Germany, the big and strong economy and Greece, the weak link. Greece’s irresponsible actions can be seen as a major cause to the crisis, as well as Germany’s inability to handle the crisis as a big economy, showing no solidarity.
Secondly we discussed the role of the banks when it comes to the European Sovereign debt crisis. We came to the conclusion that the banks of Germany and France, among other European banks, were not properly leverage after the financial crisis back in 2008. This led to the banks being too dependent on single factors, such as Greece getting in to economical problems and the possibility of defaulting. The banks should not have been allowed to make such investments by buying Greek and Portuguese government bonds, that they found themselves in a situations from where there is no exit incase Greek and Portugal would face difficult times, as they did.
In the last section of the paper we discussed the structural problem of the euro and what had gone wrong from the start when the euro was introduced. We came to the conclusion that it would have been absolutely necessary to have a common treasury as well as more integration and perhaps a step towards a more Federal State type of governance.
This paper intended to explain the most important reasons causing the European Sovereign Debt crisis and to claim that the European Sovereign Debt Crisis is much more complicated than previously thought.






