INTRODUCTION

The theoretical tools for employee work motivation that are presented for example on leadership books seem to have remained the same for decades. For example, from the theories in Rollinson (2002), the ‘newest’ theory on motivation content is from the 1970s. Motivation is still important; it drives the employee’s behaviour that influences their performance (Rollinson, 2002). 
In the same time, the business world is welcoming a new generation of employees: the Generation Y (GenY). The years when these GenY’s are born vary within the literature, as well as the terminology used to describe them. For example Smola and Sutton (2002) call these the Millennials, born between 1979 and 1994, and again Twenge, Campbell, Hoffman and Lance (2010) name them Generation Me, born between 1982 and 1999. What they all have in common is that the Generation Y is the “- recent demographic group to have entered higher education and the world of work” (Shaw and Fairhurst, 2008: 367). They are seen an important asset due to their skills: high level of education, technological whit,and productivity (Herbison and Boseman, 2009). 
Research Problem
Although the generation studies have gained attention within the field of business, most of the studies focus on comparing work values and generations (e.g. Smola and Sutton, 2002; Twenge et al., 2008). However, the studies concerning the GenY is said to be scarce (Twenge et al., 2010). Taking into account the motivation theories, which are still taught in schools and the features of the Generation Y, the fact which really motivates the newest recruits should be studies. For instance, the answer is not as simple as more pay, as the GenY employees are said to be looking more from their work than just financial gains (Ng, Schweitzer and Lyons, 2010). 
Aim of the study
The purpose of this study is to research the current literature on work motivation, especially with the Generation Y employees. Thus, the aim of the study is to examine what has been identified as motivators for employees from the Generation Y. 
Delimitations
Due to the time limitations given to the study, it will be only relying on secondary research. This means, that the results only reflect the existing literature and studies within the subject field. 

GENERATION Y – WHO THEY ARE

Before discussing the theory on motivation and analysing the current literature on Generation Y employees’ motivation, it is needed to define what is meant by Generation Y. This chapter focuses on this newest demographic group to enter the working life (Shaw and Fairhurst, 2008): how they are described in the literature.
Although it is known that Generation Y is the newest generation, problematic is that there can be found multiple terms and birth years for them: e.g. Gen-Y born between 1978 and 1999 (Herbison and Boseman, 2009) or 1982-2000 (Wong, Gardiner, Lang and Coulon, 2008), Millenials born between 1979 and 1994 (Smola and Sutton, 2002), and Generation Me born between 1982 and 1999 (Twenge et al., 2010). For this study, all of these articles will be used, and thus the birth years will be from 1979 until 2000. In addition, despite the various terms, this study will use the term Generation Y (Gen Y). 
The current literature has a wide list of adjectives by which the newest group is discussed by; although there are some positive and negative ones, they all seem to reveal the demanding nature of these belonging to the group. The most noted description has to do with technology: the Generation Y is known to have technological abilities (Sujansky and Ferri-Reed, 2010; Martin, 2005) as they are called even as an electronic generation (Herbison and Boseman, 2009). In relations, the Gen Y’s are said to be highly educated (Martin, 2005) and even claimed of being the most educated from all the generation within the work force (Herbison and Boseman, 2009). However, this does not mean that the Gen Y employees should be left dealing with their work on their own: Gen Y’s need coaching (Herbison and Boseman, 2009) and they believe in group effort (Sujansky and Ferri-Reed, 2010). 
However, Gen Y employees are claimed to have with low organisational commitment (Martin, 2005), which would mean that their turnover rate is rather high. Thus, it is important to understand these newest recruits as regardless of their high demand level, Gen Y employees are productive for the organisation due to their high level of work performance (Herbison and Boseman, 2009; Martin, 2005). 

WORK MOTIVATION

Essentially, motivation has long been the subject of interest among managers and practitioners (Guha, 2010). Motivation is something coming from within the employee focusing on the needs and expectations of a person, and ultimately defining the direction, intensity and persistence of their behaviour. It is described to be invisible; a concept, which the managers cannot force on employees. (Rollinson, 2002)This chapter focuses on the general definition of the term by discussing briefly the two viewpoints of motivation: content and process theories. 
In content theory, the aim is to satisfy the needs of the employees. The two most known content theories are Maslow’s hierarchy of needs and Hertzberg’s two-factor theory. Figure 1 presents the two-factor theory: there are certain hygiene factors that are required to prevent dissatisfaction and again motivators that ensure satisfaction. (Rollinson, 2002) This theory is an example on the current literature and what is seen as motivating for employees. 

[Figure]
If content theory focuses on the what aspect of motivation, process theory is more about the how.The three most known theories are expectancy, equity, and goal-setting theories (Rollinson, 2002). This study will focus more on the content theories due to the time and length restrictions. 

METHODOLOGY

The aim of this study is to examine what has been identified as motivators for Generation Y employees. The study is exploratory by its nature; I will search the current literature to find more knowledge on my research problem (Saunders, Lewis and Thornhill, 2007). I chose to conduct the research based on secondary data mainly due to the time and financial restrictions; especially the ability of secondary data to provide information fast is seen as an advantage of secondary research (Saunders et al., 2007). 
The access to the data was via the Hanken database; I searched for relevant articles from scholar journal through databases in Nelli. Although the database is rather extensive, it still is a limitation to the study as some of the articles cannot be found in full text.As the study’s primary target is Generation Y employees – born approximately after 1979 – I set a specific timeline for the acquired data. I chose mainly articles written after 2001, since that is when the first Generation Y employees have started to emerge to the work life; the researchers seem to have become more interested in these new generations after they have started working and not much before that.
MOTIVATING GENERATION Y EMPLOYEES (NOT FINISHED)

As the Generation Y has become the newest employees, it raises a challenge to the organisation as especially to managers. Currently there are altogether four different demographic groups working side by side – a situation that has not happened before (Shaw and Fairhurst, 2008). What then makes the Generation Y employees differ from its predecessors? 
Although the rising interest is noted (e.g. Wong et al., 2008), the empirical research conducted regarding Generation Y is still rather scarce (Twenge et al., 2010). This is especially true with the research concerning the differences in motivation, which has been limited regarding the working environment (Wong et al., 2008). In addition, despite the noted importance of the demands of Generation Y among managers, only little action has been made to cater the needs of the new employee group (Herbison and Boseman, 2009). 
As motivation theory discusses the fulfilment of employee needs, there is a challenge with the Generation Y-ers; these employees are demanding quickness and quantity from their employers when it comes to their needs (Ng et al., 2010). 


CONCLUSION 

This study examined the current literature on work motivation concerning the Generation Y employees, the most latest demographic group that has entered the working life. The aim of the study was to find out the identified motivation methods to the newest generation, which is described as technological and demanding. 

