
Influence of diversity of board of directors to corporate: UPM Case
1. Introduction
Corporate governance is one of the most important facets that determine the success or failure of any organization, especially under this competitive business environment. Since the corporate governance plays a significant role in the company operation, the capability of the committee which takes control of this management should always catch public’s eyes and keep enhancing under the examination.  So which part of the company is mainly responsible for the corporate governance and affects the diversity of firm, or to another word, which committee guides the firm to develop to the right direction with crucial strategic mechanisms? 
The answer for the above questions is obvious: the board of directors. Board is the group and committee of people responsible for supervising the affairs of a corporation. Members are selected by the firm’s stockholders and they generally set broad corporate policy rather than participating in the daily managerial decisions. (Morten Huse, 2007) They normally guide the floor level to operate the corporate on the “right way”.
So the diversity of boards of directors will bring the significant influence to the diversity of the corporate, such as the structure, company strategy and policy and so on. In this study, the author will investigate the relationship between the diversity of corporate and board. The UPM, which is a bioenergy manufacture company leads integration bio and forest industries in Finland, will be the main candidate of the case study. The saying goes, one should learn from past mistakes and experiences. This can certainly be applicable to UPM. It should understand which way do they walk on and how do they remain advantages as a serious competitor and keep away from global competition. The fundamental question at UPM today is: how does the diversity of its board of directors perform, what influence does the diversity bring to the operation of corporate, and what future version or strategy for the diversity of its board. These 
The intention of this paper is therefore to build an understanding of the diversity and operation of UPM’s board and by dong this gets a deeper insight to the multi disciplinary nature of corporate governance. The diversity of board of directors will be approved from various perspectives and disciplines in the following order: gender, nationality and age. Each discipline has its set of concerns and influence to corporate and by trying to understand the issues from different perspectives. 
Finally, the central issues are presented in a conclusion. In order to support the UPM case study, the researcher also compares the Nokia with it together through the previous case study and research. This will be more clear and easier to see how the diversity of board of directors affects the diversity of corporate. 

1.1 Basic background
1.1.1 Company
UPM-Kymmene Corporation is a Finnish pulp, paper and timber manufacturer. UPM was built by Repola Ltd and Kymmene Corporation and its subsidiary United Paper Mills Ltd in 1996. Its headquarter is located in Helsinki, Finland. Until 2012, there are nine board directors stand for the UPM, which Björn Wahlroos works as the chairman and Jussi Pesonen is voted as the president and CEO.  The company employs about 24,000 people around the worldwide and expands its production plants in 16 countries. Among these groups, the EU employees occupy 80% while Europe indicates 85%. UPM is the world’s leading producer of graphic papers and second-largest producer of self-adhesive label materials. It is listed in the NASDAQ OMX Helsinki stock exchange. The company logo, the griffin, was designed by Hugo Simberg in 1899. The reason why griffin was chosen as the company logo is that because it represents a guardian of the northern forests.
[Figure]
UPM consists of six independent business areas: Energy, Pulp, Forest and timber, Paper, Label and Plywood. Fibre-and biomass-based business, recyclable raw materials and products are cornerstones of UPM’s business. 

[Figure]

UPM has created the “biofore” term to describe new forest industry. “Bio” stands sustainable solutions and environmental performance. “Fore” stands for forest and the company’s position at the forefront of the development. UPM create value from renewable and recyclable materials by combining its expertise and technologies within fibre-based, energy-related and engineered materials business. 
Furthermore UPM keep looking for new business opportunities in Grada, ProFi, Fibril Cellulose, ForMi, BioVerno and Living area. 
The sales of UPM exceed 10 billion euros in 2011. The biggest markets are Europe which occupy 69% market share in total. And the Asia market is 14% while North America states 11%. It indicates that in recent years, UPM keep looking for and expanding broader overseas markets.
[Figure]
[Figure]
              
1.1.2 Board of directors
There are 9 members in the board, among which are elected the Chairman and the Vice Chairman. The election or reelection of the members of the Board is proposed by the Nomination and Corporate Governance Committee during the Annual General Meeting. Both genders shall be represented in the board. 
Every member of the board has to be independent, except the CEO of UPM, which is a requirement applicable to publicly listed companies in Finland. He also has to be significant shareholder, in order to be well representative of the shareholders’ interests. 
UPM chose to elect only qualified directors. This fact seems to reflect the resource- dependence vision of UPM, according to which directors have to bring to the company some resources (financial, expertise, networks, etc.). 
Some directors can have functions in other companies only if they manage to devote the necessary time and attention to UPM. In fact, all members are chairmen or CEO of another company, which can contribute to the network and the knowledge of the environment.
UPM-Kymmene Corporation’s (UPM) control and governance seems mostly ensured by the board of directors of the company considering the roles attributed by UPM to the board. However, regarding the following scheme, the board seems to have a limited role in the strategy formulation, but it is more present for the strategy evaluation.







[Figure]
1.2 Problem statement
From the research and study of UPM from its business and board management versions, the authors aim to analyze their diversity of UPM board. With the quick development around the worldwide and overseas area, the international and foreign employees will join the UPM group and contribute to its future operation. So this phenomenon also will bring a significant influence to the board management and operation under this global trend. Under the same global business trend, why Nokia becomes the specific international corporate with the international and various board directors team, while the UPM “remains” more “local” top-management group? How this phenomenon brings the effect to their company? What do they think of the diversity of board?
So the authors look forward to study that whether the UPM board has realized this diversity problem and how could they face to this trend which will be a double-edged sword to the company operation. Is there any possibility that the Finnish local board will accept more foreign members join in the group? 
1.3 Scope and limitations of research 
The diversity of the board includes many various aspects, such as: gender, age and nationality. So the most efficient way to find out the reality is that the author need to interview with the directors of board in UPM face-to-face. This maybe means that it is not too much practical to carry out a research on the whole field of board. 
Because obviously the top management directors are usually busy so that maybe have no time to interview the author in some specific place at the specific time. And furthermore, to protect UPM, it seems that not everyone will tell the “true story” or the inside reality about the diversity of UPM board. 
As such, the researcher will limit the scope of this research to enable her concentrate and focus on a particular issue of particular importance to the field. 
1.4 Objective of research
The author will be guided by one major objective throughout the research. The major objective of the research will be to address the nature of the relationship between the diversity of corporate and board. The research aims to find out why the diversity of the board will influence the diversity of company, how could it influence and the final results it makes. 
2. Literature review
Previous research on diversity typically follows two general distinctions: the observable (demographic) and the non-observable (cognitive). For example, the observable diversity is generally gender, age, race and ethnicity, while the non-observable are knowledge, education, personality characteristics and perception (Maznevski, 1994; Milliken and Martins, 1996; Pelled, et al,1996) However most research on diversity and its effects on performance focus on observable or demographic diversity. Thus the author defines diversity as the representation of gender, age and ethnic differences on board of directors. 
This study considers the diversity as it directly reflects the increasing numbers of women, Asian and Black entering into the management labor market (Conyon and Mallin, 1997) and the average is decreasing down from 58 years old. There is research that suggests that diversity is increasing-especially by gender. Daily et al. (1999) concluded that for a study of Fortune 500 firms, that women have made significant progress in terms of assuming seats on boards of directors, but have not in terms of taking CEO positions. Bilimoria (2000) reports that even though the number of female board members is increasing slightly, few companies actively recruit females and there is still sex bias, stereotyping and tokenism on boards where women serve. Mattis (2000) concludes that women board members are increasing in numbers but the changes are small and incremental. While this research focuses more on gender rather than racial diversity, the evidence suggests that the composition of boards of directors in American corporations is beginning to increasingly reflect the changes in workforce diversity (Burke, 1995).
3. Research Methodology
In the research, the qualitative analysis and quantitative analysis approach have been used to collect the information and analyze the data. Among the research process, both primary and secondary data are needed for analysis, which are gathered from various sources to address research questions and finish the project. 
3.1 Methodology Theory
Qualitative research is a type of scientific research approach. It mainly includes following characteristics, seeking answers to a question, systematically using a predefined set of procedures to answer a question, collecting evidence and information and indicating outcome that were marked to analyze in advance. (Sharan B, 2009) There are three most common qualitative methods which are participant observation, in-depth interviews and focus group. The types of data qualitative methodology are field notes, audio / video recording, and transcripts. (fhi360.org) Qualitative research method mainly aims at understanding and answers primarily to how.

Compared to the qualitative research method, quantitative research aims at explanation and answers to why. It focuses more on the collection and analysis of numerical data and statistics with questionnaires and etc. The observation units of quantitative method are group, institutions, texts and event or activity. (Books Llc, 2010)
The basic differences between quantitative and qualitative research methods are as follows:
Analytical objectives
Types of questions they explore
Types of data collection instrument and methods they use
Forms of data they produce
Degree of flexibility built into study design (fhi360.org)

[Table]

Referring to the research data, primary data is mainly to collect new data specially for a purpose while secondary data is the data and source have been gathered for some previous other purpose or scientific study. (Sharan B, 2009)
3.2 Overview of the Empirical Research
In this thesis, interview is chosen as an approach of qualitative research method. Directors of board from UPM are invited to attend the interview. The chance of the interview with the top managers of UPM is really precious. And the author met one of the directors of UPM in one guest lecturer in Hanken School of economics. And they discussed with the manager when lecture finished about whether they could interview the directors of board of UPM. And fortunately the director agreed and he also promised that he will invite some more members to join in this meeting. 
Referring to the quantitative method, the primary data and information are collected through interview and questionnaires from the directors and staff of UPM. The secondary data is collected from internet resources and literature. The print-questionnaires contain about 10 questions and all the questions made for research are valid and credible. The authors will provide and ask some more flexible and detailed questions to the board members to explore the deeper and inside reality. 

4. Results
From the interview and analysis of the questionnaires, the author find that the diversity f the UPM board does not perform obviously and actively. 
The composition of the board:
(chairman) Björn Wahlroos, 60 years old, Ph.D. (Econ.), Chairman of the Board of Directors of Sampo Plc.
(vice chairman) Berndt Brunow, 62 years old, B.Sc. (Econ.), Chairman of the Board of Directors of Oy Karl Fazer Ab.
Matti Alahuhta, 60 years old, D.Sc. (Eng.), President and CEO of KONE Corporation
Karl Grotenfelt, 68 years old, LL.M., Chairman of the Board of Directors of Famigro Oy
Wendy E. Lane, 61 years old, MBA (Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration), Chairman of the Board of Directors of Lane Holdings, Inc.
Jussi Pesonen, 52 years old, M.Sc. (Eng.), President and CEO of UPM-Kymmene Corporation
Ursula Ranin, 49 years old, LL.M., B.Sc. (Econ.), member of the Board of Directors of Finnair Plc. 
Veli-Matti Reinikkala, 55 years old, eMBA, President of ABB Process Automation Division
Kim Wahl, 52 years old, MBA, BA, Business Economics, Owner and Chairman of the Board of the investment firm Stromstangen AS
(1) It indicates that the average age of the members of board is around 55.7 years old.
(2) Most of them are local Finnish and only two of the directors come from Canada and USA.
(3) Among the 9 members of board, UPM has two female directors.
5. Conclusion
Though with some limitations, this study has contributed important information relating to diversity effects on the operation of corporate. Accordingly, this research has significant theoretical, practical and empirical implications. 
Under the serious competition around the worldwide and overseas business, UPM should seriously consider the potential for the enhanced representation and perspective diversity might create. The diversity of board of directors will made great contributions to the diversity of UPM. They may think about to accept more foreign members to deal with the international trade and partner relationship. And also the international group will broaden horizon and explore wider overseas marketing. The younger directors also can provide the fresh and advanced ideas and strategy to the company. All of above will motive and promote UPM operate on the right and advanced position compared to its competitors nowadays.   

