Demographics and Buying Behaviour of E-commerce Customers: A Case Study


1      INTRODUCTION

1.1.   Motivation for the Term Paper

The e-commerce business to consumer market has been growing significantly during
the last years in Finland. Across the board the percentage of people regularly doing
online shopping has been steadily growing during the last years. The available general
statistics over the Internet usage of the population also shows that the trend is for both
older and other community groups to take part in the online experience. (OSF 2011)


To understand your customers is a key success factor when running an online retail
business. By having an understanding of who you customers are and what influences
their buying behaviour everything from marketing to stock choices can be optimized in
order to achieve larger profit margins. Therefore also the research community is
increasing its interest as the e-commerce activity is increasing.


This term paper will focus on explaining what predicts the behaviour of the e-
commerce customers of the case company. When combining this knowledge with
general theories this study aims to be able to provide empirical evidence for their
applicability in practice. Furthermore, this information is of interest for the case
company and thus warrants a discussion on how to utilize the information.


The paper will use a unique data set containing detailed information on the visitors to
an e-commerce website. The data set contains both information on visitors that
finished their transaction, and visitors that aborted their checkout process. This term
paper may therefore also shed some light on which kind of people abort their buying
decision.


1.2.   Research Question

Several of the previous research papers done on demographics and e-commerce
customer behaviour have either used the same background material, or used interviews
of e-commerce users as their source of information. As this study will use a unique data
set gathered from a running e-commerce business the study will be able to answer more
statistically how the visitors are behaving and whom they are. This study also needs to
develop a novel model for determining the demographics from an incomplete data set.
Thus this study aims to answer the following main research question:

       How can the available characteristics explain the buying behaviour of the e-
       commerce website visitors?


1.3.   Limitations

The data is already gathered, and due to time constraints the researcher will not be able
to use qualitative methods in order to profile the demographics. Only the data already
recorded by the e-commerce system of the case company will be used.


1.4.   Structure of the Term Paper

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The following chapter presents the
research methodology used. Next, the chapter reviewing previous literature with
relevance to the research question follows. Following the literature review, there is an
analysis of the material collected and how the research questions could be answered.
Finally, there is a chapter with concluding remarks on the research questions.
 

2      RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

This chapter presents the research methods in this study. It walks through the
literature review process, describes the case study methodology chosen, and thereby
provides a basis for the further analysis.

The unit of analysis in this study is the visitors to the e-commerce website of the case
company. Therefore, a mainly quantitative research method is used, but as the study is
done as a specific case the aspects of a single case study must be taken into account.
The empirical data is collected using the e-commerce solution provided by the case
company.



2.1.   Literature Review Process

According to Yin (2002) in his book on case studies the aim of a literature review is to
"help develop sharper and more detailed questions". Thus the literature review has
been focusing on developing the subject matters in such a way that it will support the
empirical stage in this study.

When an interesting article has been found the references of that article has been used
in order to find out how the original researcher supported his arguments. Thereby
finding out more relevant and in-depth information on the subject matter.
Furthermore, articles citing the identified interesting piece of research were
investigated. As Webster and Watson (2002) argue that you need to go both forwards
and backwards from your literature sources in order to get at complete consensus of the
concepts reviewed.


2.2. Single Case Study Method

This study uses the single case study method since it fulfils the criteria posed by Yin
(2002) for motivating a case study. Yin (2002) argues that case studies are primarily
aimed at solving problems that can be formulated as how and why questions when the
researcher cannot influence the outcome to a large extent and the focus is on a real-life
contemporary phenomena (Yin 2002). Moreover when the research question is
formulated as a how question it automatically leads to a more explanatory study where
case study would be preferred.
 
According to Eisenhardt (1989) and Yin (2002) a case study can contain any mix of
qualitative and quantitative data. Yin (2002) presents and discusses six sources of
evidence; documentation, archival records, interviews, direct observations, participant-
observation and physical artefacts. In this study the documentation provided the
primary source of case data and is therefore discussed in a separate section. Other
sources of evidence used are archival records and direct observations. Using multiple
data collection methods will help in making the points clearer and more robust.

Finally, it is important that a reader is able to follow the chain of the research. In
practice it means that you are able to go back from the conclusions to the original data.
The chain of evidence needs to be communicated clearly in order to raise the validity of
the arguments and results from the study. The researcher should also show that he has
made his best to collect all relevant information.


2.2.1. Data Collection and Statistical Analysis

As the researcher has direct access to the e-commerce solution of the case company, the
data will be directly extracted from their database. The extracted data will then be
processed and refined in order to help the final analysis.

Descriptive statistics will be presented of the collected data. Furthermore, some sort of
multiple regression analysis will be performed on the data set in order to be able to
present a solution to the research question.

For analysing the collected data the statistical program Stata is used. The program has
good reputation in academic research and provides many of the tools needed for
generating proper and clear presentation of the results. (Stata 2012)
 
3      LITERATURE REVIEW

This chapter presents literature with relevance to the research question in order to be
able to perform a more developed argumentation in the empirical part. The chapter
concludes in a synthesis, which will be used as a starting point for the empirical
analysis.


3.1.   Overview of E-commerce Business

What characterizes the e-commerce business in Finland is currently the immense
growth that it is showing on all fronts. There is first of all an overall growth of online
spending among all age groups.

The growth is also explained by the increasing number of online shops in itself, and
thereby the increase in product categories available online.

A research performed by TNS Gallup puts the size of online business in Finland to over
10 billion euro for 2011 (Kaupan liitto 2012), while showing a 10 % average growth
across all sectors. The five largest sectors in Finland, according to their research are:
travelling, motor, electronics, living and energy, and gambling. The product retailing
stood for 47 % of the total e-commerce revenue.


3.2. Online Buying Behaviour

The most significant difference when comparing to a traditional shopping experience is
that in an online environment the customer is more in control of which choices he
makes in order to find a potential buy. The intent might even be very unclear from the
beginning, as when browsing or searching the Internet the website visitor might be
influenced to make a buy.

Low conversion rate compared to traditional shops. One reason might be the very low
cost for the website visitor to only browse, without feeling pressure from the assistants
in the shop or using energy in his activities.

You need to convert the mindset of the website visitor into buying. What their objective
is from the start is very hard to deduce.

Another important attribute is that your website needs to communicate trust.
    
An e-commerce site might also adopt a value-added strategy instead of price
competition. (Chen & Dubinsky 2003)


3.3. Predicting E-commerce Behaviour

Direct access to the website would be more likely to purchase than the visitors who
access the site through transferring websites (indirect visit) (Park 2009).

The website visitor might only be browsing, searching for information or ready to make
a purchase. Therefore, especially in the case of the first two actions, the website owner
need to be able to; firstly, identify the action pattern of the visitor; and secondly, take
responsive action in order to convert the intent of the visitor into a purchase action.

The fact that different kind of design and colours impact the choices of customers
browsing a web site is proved by for example Mandel and Johnson (1999).
Furthermore, they go on to prove that which information that the customers are
exposed to impacts their decisions. Häubl and Trifts (2000) also show this and that the
customers purchase quality, i.e. their conversion rate, increases.

Therefore the design and usability considerations are of utmost importance to a serious
e-commerce vendor. As by prediction of the behaviour you are able to choose such
design and in-site marketing choices that will result in the highest sales conversion
rate, which will in the end influence your bottom-line in a positive way. Research also
confirms the advantage that online retailers can get when predicting their customer's
behaviour (Andersen et al. 2000; Bucklin et al. 2002).

Häubl and Trifts (2000) conclude that aids should be available for helping the
customer choose the right products. These aids should in theory be able to perfectly
suggest which product the visitor wants to buy.


3.4. Literature Synthesis

It is essential to be able to predict behaviour in order to optimize marketing material.
Additionally, in-site product advertisements or even discounts presented to some type
of users in order to encourage a buy.
 
In this study the case material only consists of registered users. That means that the
visitors have already trusted the e-commerce site to some degree. To further measure
the trust the non-obligatory variables age and gender could be used.

The visitors stemming from direct traffic should be more goal-oriented. (Park 2009)
 
4      EMPIRICAL FINDINGS

This chapter focuses on presentation and analysis of the collected case data within the
context of the research question. The chapter concludes in a discussion of the findings.


4.1.   Presentation of the Data Set

The main data set and focus of this empirical analysis contains details of visitors who
completed the registration process of the e-commerce site. Both those who registered
as a guest and as a permanent user are included. The main difference and focus of
attention is whether the payment process was successfully completed. See Table 2 for
the complete descriptive statistical overview of the data set.

The most novel characteristic in the main data set is the independent variable
nearestdist. This variable measures the distance from the visitor to the nearest
shopping centre. The location of a shopping centre has been approximated in this study
to the location of a Hennes & Mauritz store (2012), since the fact is that they are very
well represented in all larger locations in Finland.

The other characteristics can be observed in Table 1.

[Table]


The plan is to use isorder as the dependent variable for the statistical analysis. As the
variable is a dummy, the model chosen for estimating it is logistic regression (also
called logit model).


4.2. Preliminary Results
                                                        [Table]


The preliminary analysis with the logit model shows that the AUC criterion holds, as it
is larger than the null-model benchmark of 0.5. The area under ROC curve is 0.6986
for 554 observations.


[Figure]

[Table]

The current preliminary results seem good for further investigation and validation of
the statistical methods and results.
                                 



4.3. Demographics of Buyers and Non-payers


4.4. Prediction of Behaviour


4.5. Discussion
                                          

5      CONCLUSIONS

This chapter is still under consideration in this version of the paper draft.


5.1.   Results

The most novel theoretical and empirical contribution of this paper is the usage of the
distance to the nearest shopping centre for profiling the demographics and behaviour
of the e-commerce visitor.


5.2. Value for the Case Company

This research paper confirms the feelings for the customer demographics that the case
company had.

The paper will act as a starting point for site optimization with regards to buying
behaviour analysis. The case company should include the implementations of the
findings in this research paper for the marketing and e-commerce platform design.

This paper also shows that there is a need for the case company to also start logging the
clickstream of the website visitors in such a way that the data can be analyzed on-the-
flow by the e-commerce application in order to take more dynamic stance for what to
show to the visitor (Andersen et al. 2000).



5.3. Further Research

There might be more variables that could be considered for inclusion in the empirical
analysis that would bring more light into the case. For example the past buying
behaviour of the visitors should be taken into account.

When the clickstream data has been gathered, it should be combined with all
characteristics identified in this report and then analyzed on the basis of how well
different buying aids are able to influence the decisions of the visitors. This would
further increase the value of the work done for this report.
                                          
