How evolving from service marketing to design thinking affects business: A comparative study of Bang & Olufsen and Nike


1     INTRODUCTION

This study compares the service marketing and design thinking strategies of Bang &
Olufsen and Nike in order to examine how implementing these have affected their
business. By reviewing the theories behind these strategies and comparing them to
practical cases, the author is able to pinpoint some of the fundamental success factors
these strategies provide. Using qualitative data gathered from case articles the author
then tests the relationship between service marketing and design thinking in order to
establish what common denominators can be identified. Finally the author will assume
the synergies of the two theories and suggest possible areas for further research.


1.2 PURPOSE OF THE STUDY


In recent years, confronting the current economic climate, companies have actively been
exploring new business models to improve their market position. Globalization has led
to increased access to goods, innovation and raw material that have propelled
companies to bring out new products at intensifying speed. As these resources are
becoming more widely available, an increasing amount of companies are able to enter
the market. However, this presents challenges in terms of differentiating ones offerings
from competitors offering the same product. This study focus on the service perspective
in which added services, supporting the core product, brings the desired effects of
differentiation. This study compares the service marketing and design thinking
strategies of Bang & Olufsen and Nike, with the aim of establishing common
denominators of success in the who models.


1.3 LIMITATIONS


The scope of this study, comparing cases of two companies, will not sufficiently
represent applications in the wider world or in other areas of business. Nevertheless, in
creating the assessment based on theories and comparing them to actual events will
give an indication on the impact of the given methods. It is also difficult to project the
alternative implications other product development or marketing efforts might have had,
as the events unfolded in the cases can not be reversed.
                                              




1.4 RESEARCH PROBLEM


In the past, product differentiation strategies have relied heavily on product
development and innovation by adding new features, making products lighter, or
tougher, or otherwise differentiate themselves from the competition. In the 1970's
service marketing emerged, shifting focus from product to customer. More recently, a
supporting method has emerged out of the field of art and design, known as design
thinking, as "functional benefits alone, it seems, are no longer enough to capture or
create the brand distinction" Brown (2009).


What is the difference between service marketing and design thinking? Are there any
similarities, and if so, how are they accomplished? This paper aims to evaluate impact,
if any, service marketing and design thinking, or lack thereof, have had on the business
of Bang & Olufsen and Nike respectively.
                                             




2     THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

On one hand, academic research on service marketing is rigorous and plenty, on the
other hand not much research have been conducted regarding design thinking. Despite
this, their similarities are remarkable, considering the fact that service marketing stems
from marketing within economics, while design thinking stems from design within the
arts. To start with, both consider themselves perspectives, as opposed to rigorous
quantitatively measurable theories or clear cut methods of conduct.


2.1 SERVICE MARKETING AS A CONCEPT


Origins of the logic of service marketing can be found in basic human psychology and
is fundamentally considered a perception. "Customers do not buy goods or services,
they buy the benefits goods and services provide them with" Grönroos (2007, p. 4), as
originally found by Theodore Levitt (1980, p. 83-91). Products and services are
consumed by customers to fulfill their needs. The premise of service marketing is to put
the customer in focus in the product development process, rather than the product itself,
and thereby companies is able to offer more satisfying solutions to its customers.


An ongoing debate have been going on since before the Levitt article was published, on
why companies have such difficulties changing their old product centered behavior.
Positive effects of service marketing have been proven through extensive academic
research (Gummesson, 2002; Grönroos, 2006) and it is generally accepted that service
marketing improves customer satisfaction and loyalty (Grönroos, (2007). But despite
numerous and overwhelmingly clear findings, very few companies today have managed
to change their perspectives. New strategies have to be implemented, as Christian
Grönroos (2007, p. 7) identifies four key strategic perspectives in marketing as; core
product, price, service and image.


2.2 DESIGN THINKING AS A CONCEPT


Design thinking, also conceived in the 1970`s, stems from human-centered design, as
designer Rolf Faste expanded on design engineer Robert McKim's book Experience in
Visual Thinking (1973) while teaching at Stanford University. Fundamentally, it is a
method for designers to solve problems during the design process mainly in
architecture, product design and service design (Buchanan, 1992). It's teachings was
adapted into business use by design consultancy firm IDEO founders Tim Brown and
David Kelley. However, as Tim Brown explains in his book Change by Design (Brown,
2009) design thinking has not been studied academically and thus not reached very far
beyond the design community. In the same book, which the author have found is the
best account of design thinking to date, Brown talks extensively about the importance of
meaning and storytelling. How a product or service is perceived by a customer directly
affects the kinds of feelings the person have for the good, both positively and
negatively. Design thinking is about the designer being able to take the perspective of
the customer in order to understand how the person thinks and behaves in certain
situations.


2.3 CONNECTING THE DOTS

As already mentioned above, the need for alternative methods of differentiation is
needed for companies in a globally connected world. From the previous two paragraphs
we can conclude that service marketing and design thinking are different stages of the
same process, only the approach is what separates them. We can establish from this, that
by utilizing the framework for design thinking in product development processes,
companies are able to incorporate the functionality needed to lay the groundwork for
what service marketing will at a later stage be able to support. And as we will see later
in this study, if the two entities do not match the consequences can be detrimental to the
companies image.
                                    

3    COMPARATIVE STUDY

In order to lay the foundations for this study the author chose to select two companies
with different approaches and perspectives on product development and design. Taking
a look at a case concerning each company illustrates the difference starting point they
represent, but at the same time demonstrate how powerful service marketing and design
thinking can be when introduced into a corporate culture. As explained in the cases
below it is obvious that Bang & Olufsen have embedded these perspectives since the
company was founded in 1925, while it took Nike over three decades to fully
comprehend the implications of putting its customers in focus.


3.1 CASE: BANG & OLUFSEN

The danish consumer electronics company Bang & Olufsen operates on a holistic
design driven innovation model. That incorporates merging all its offerings to work in
tandem with each other in a way supporting different customer needs with various
products. When a customer buys a television from Bang & Olufsen one year and then
buys external speakers from the same company the next year, the customer can be sure
the speakers will connect seamlessly to the television. Even the same remote control is
used to control all the companies products, as opposed to most other consumer
electronics companies where radios and television remote controls change from year-to-
year. Even the variation in different models on sale during the same time period can
have countless variations in their remote controls, resulting in people having a myriad
of remote controls at their house performing different tasks, with only a handful of
buttons being useful on each remote (Austin and Beyersdorfer, 2007).


When a new product is being conceived by Bang & Olufsen designers, the first and
foremost focus have always been its customers. The emphasis is made on the
environments in which their customers live and how well the product will blend in to
those surroundings, as beautifully as the art and decorations previously occupying their
spaces. However, not only the looks of the products are taken into considered at this
early stage of product development, aspects such as ease of use and how intuitive the
operation of the products will be is put in focus. The combination of the considerations
of these matters are what makes Bang & Olufsen what is is, even though all of the
components inside their machines are the very same components used and
manufactured by its competitors. Only the reason for Bang & Olufsen being able to
charge a premium for their products is the fact that every aspect of the product, when
placed into the reality of its customers use is taught through from start to finnish. Put
into the context of Grönroos four strategic perspectives Bang & Olufsen is categorized
into the service perspective.


3.2 CASE: NIKE

In 1999 Nike became the center of attention in a scandal as a result of child labour and
poor working conditions being exposed by Naomi Klein in her book No Logo. Not only
did the message emerging from this book not resonate with the clean and sporty image
Nike wanted to portray, but it did not support any of the marketing material in the
campaigns being executed worldwide by the company at that time. Marketing money
was proving to be worthless against the newly emerged public opinion and Nike quickly
realized that it was time to improve its workers' conditions in its production plants.
(Klein, 1999).


As opposed to Bang & Olufsen, according to the Grönroos for strategic perspectives
model, Nike clearly utilize the image perspective. Such a company is much more prone
to scrutiny, as such a large part of what Nike is offering is based purely on the company
logo printed or sown on its garments and apparel. Studying the No Logo case it
becomes clear that what was revealed about the company not only affected Nike, but
actually affected the whole industry as a whole. Certainly Nike was at the time being
affected most, but it was how its managers and CEO reacted to the scandal that was
impressive. Instead of trying to blame anyone else, they initially publicly apologized
and made some changes at their production plants. In 2004 they founded The Nike
Foundation, focusing on improving the lives of workers in countries they manufactures
in, with special emphasis on girls (Nike Foundation, 2004). Later, a new research
division focusing solely on customers desires was founded, where ideas such as the
electronic running aid for iPhone and iPod, Nike+ was released. From the same
laboratories emerged an online tool on Nike's website for people to engage in the design
process by decorating their own shoes. But the most important break through have been
discovering new ways to manufacture shoes, with the aim of zero waist material (Mc
Girt, 2010). The ultimate goal with innovating new methods is to make production
cheap enough to bring back the production to homeland markets, such as the USA. As a
result, both working conditions as well as costs can be more easily controlled, while
demand for products in original production countries is on the rise and thus securing
jobs over there as well (Hunter, 2012).
                                          
4     DISCUSSION

Studying the methodology of Bang & Olufsen and Nike initially exposed two very
different approaches to product development. But as Nike ensued criticism for its
conducts and ethical choices, they knew they had to alter their methods or loose
business. What they did was incorporated design thinking during its production phases
and adopting a service marketing into its company culture, something already embodied
in the Bang & Olufsen DNA since its foundation. The alternative is grim, as was briefly
demonstrated in the Nike case, where Nike for years after the scandal had problems
with its reputation. Slowly building itself back up and regaining momentum have
proven the right strategy for them in a bid to keep at the forefront of innovation and
desirability within their field. Bang & Olufsen on the other hand have not been as
successful in reinventing themselves, despite a good strategy, but that will have to be
left as the topic for another study.
                                            

5     CONCLUSIONS

Companies are facing increased competition from globalization, while at the same time
consumers get more conscious and thus demand greater transparency. Inevitably, as
Grönroos has already concluded companies need to start applying service marketing to
their thinking. As have been interesting to observe in this study, the world of production
and design have its own method for answering the same challenges, design thinking.
This study clearly show a strong relationship between these strategies, that suggests the
combined used of both perspectives each in its own respective stage is appropriate.
Thus, companies who adapt both design thinking in their product development and
interaction with customers on a product level, while embracing a service marketing
logic throughout its organization and market communication will pass the test of the
consumers, will be the most desired brands and be the winners of the future. The author
suggests more thorough research in this are be conducted in order to establish the
relevance of each component and determine the relationship of the two co-existing as
equally important components for business success.

