
Differences between Finland and Austria among the political and economical landscape


1. Introduction

Recently, there has been wide interest in the connection between politics and business in Austria. Many politicians, who had important political positions ten years ago, are now suspected to have been corruptive during their term of office. Due to the reason, that I am exchange student in Finland at the moment, I started to scrutinize the way politics are made in Finland. 
There is much evidence to support the hypothesis, that corruption is spread wider among the southern parts of Europe than for instance the Scandinavian area. The “Corruption Perceptions Index 2010” of “Transparency International” shows, that Finland is getting the best grade for its transparency, whereas Austria is valued two categories lower. (Transparency International, 2012)
But also data have been presented in the literature, explained by Richard D. Lewis that “Finns open and conduct meetings with the premise that stating the truth, whether pleasant or not, is the best way to achieve a successful outcome”. Furthermore he points out that “Finns are individualists, but in Finland individualism does not involve breaking the law.” (Lewis R. D., 2004)
Nevertheless the cultural and ethical differences between these two countries and their effects on politics, as well as the field of business, require further investigation. Business and politics are closely linked to each other in Austria, and the higher willingness of politicians to act not completely legally, shows the importance of investigating reasons for this behaviour.
Despite the importance of cultural differences between countries, moderate research has been done which focuses on the effects of these differences on the political landscape. 
Therefore the questions remain: How does the culture of a country influence the political landscape? As well as: Why is it common in Finland, to have more trust into the political system and their politicians?
My paper evaluates the differences between Finland and Austria concerning the culture and ethics. After knowing the main differences, I will focus on, how these differences are causing the problems the Austrian political system is suffering at the moment and why Finland is in so many indexes on the first place.
This paper hopes to show that it is doable to change parts of the political system of a country as well as some ethics in order to make politics more trustworthy and to increase the general welfare among the citizens. 



2. The political system in Finland

In March 2000 Finland rewrote its constitution, which had effects on the power of the president. From that time on, “Finland has a mixed presidential/parliamentary system with executive powers divided between the president, who has primary responsibility for national security and foreign affairs, and the prime minister, who has primary responsibility for all other areas, including European Union (EU) issues.” (EBSCO, 2010)
Since March 2012 the president of Finland is Sauli Niinistö, which is directly elected by the citizens for six years and for a maximum of two following consecutive terms. The 200 members of the unicameral parliament are elected for four years and their head is the prime minister, who is currently Jyrki Katainen. Finland was the first country worldwide, which introduced the female suffrage in 1906. From that time on, the parliament has been dominated by three main parties; the Centre Party, the National Coalition Party and the Social Democrats. But during the elections in 2011 the increasing amounts of votes for the True Finns Party, showed a clear step to the right. The True Finns are now on the third place with about 34 % of votes. (Wikipedia, 2012)



3. The political system in Austria

The head of state in Austria is the Federal President, who is Heinz Fischer at the moment. He is elected directly from the citizens and gets elected for six years for maximum two times. The president also appoints the chairman of the Federal Government, which is called the Federal Chancellor, and currently Werner Faymann. In Austria the executive power is exercised by local and federal governments. Federal legislative power is made by two chambers of parliament, namely the National Council and the Federal Council. The more dominant chamber is the National Council which has 183 members and is elected for five years by proportional representation. (Wikipedia, 2012)
Since 1949 two main parties are dominant among Austria’s political landscape: the conservative Austrian People's Party (ÖVP) and the center-left Social Democratic Party of Austria (SPÖ). Also in Austria there is a right wing party which gained its votes over the years. It is called Freedom Party (FPÖ) and started to become more popular when Jörg Haider took over the leadership of the party in 1986 until they got 27 % during the elections in 1999. After a reduce in 2002 to 10 %, they could still increase their votes again in 2008 to 17.5 %. (Wikipedia, 2012)



4. How are politics and business linked to each other in these countries?

4.1. What is corruption?
A simple definition of corruption is the use of political power for private gain. Or defined by Shahabuddin Syed: “corruption is the abuse of public offices by public officials in which they accept or demand bribes in return for favors such as to perform their official duties expeditiously or to skew laws in favor of the giver.” Shahabuddin also describes that there are two main conditions which either encourage or discourage corruption. Firstly it depends on how much punishment is given by the law of a society for abusing political power and secondly the amount of cultural acceptance in a society. But in order to understand how these conditions are creating environments in which corruption is possible, it is important to take a look on what is influencing these conditions. (Shahabuddin, 2007)
The amount of income in a country is one of the first incentives for the amount of corruption. “People with low incomes have higher marginal value for additional income.” Countries with low income levels give government jobs a high potential for earning extra money. Nevertheless, just paying people in governmental positions a higher amount of money does not lower the risk of corrupting. The punishment for doing so has to be high in these countries and societies as well, otherwise the potential of corruption is staying at a high level. (Shahabuddin, 2007)
But also economical theories for corruption can be found. “According to Scott, the greater the size of a public sector, the greater its potential for corruption.” But also the degree of governmental control of economic activity is related to corruption. If economies are highly controlled, the people who are taking governmental jobs are making nearly all economic decisions. Their decisions will have the power in order to say who has economic success. Of course the result is, that bribery makes it possible for citizens to achieve higher economic success and wealth. Additionally to that Levin and Renelt, and Barro “found a strong relationship between school enrollment and educational attainment and economic growth. An educated population results in higher economic growth that causes equal distribution of resources among people.” (Shahabuddin, 2007)

4.2. Lobbyism – Interaction between business and politics
The etymology of the word lobbyism comes from the word lobby, but in particular the lobbies or hallways of the House of Parliament are meant. Dictionary definitions are “Lobbying is a form of advocacy with the intention of influencing decisions made by the government by individuals or more usually by Lobby groups; it includes all attempts to influence legislators and officials, whether by other legislators, constituents, or organized groups.” (Wikipedia, 2012)

4.3. The situation in Finland

4.4. The situation in Austria

5 Effects of cultural differences on the political and economical landscape
6 Conclusion


