Barriers for coordination in Humanitarian Logistics 
1.0 Introduction and problem definition
The field of humanitarian logistics is a very relevant subject in today’s world as both natural and man-made disasters are becoming more frequent, the total number of natural disasters has multiplied six- fold during the last 30 years (Schulz & Blecken, 2010; CRED, 2007-2008). The effectiveness of logistics activities in disaster areas relies on several different things. The level of preparation, expertise, materials, and finance are all areas on which a humanitarian aid operation can stand or fall.  The field has also caught the researchers eye as the agility of humanitarian logistics is considered to be of very high standards (Oloruntoba & Gray, 2006). This agility is considered to be the result of constantly dealing with unpredictability in operations and because of this being very responsive to disruptions in the supply chain. Despite this agility there are several major natural and organizational barriers that hinder humanitarian aid operations and no matter how well prepared or financed an organization is, the overall functionality still depends on the level of coordination between the organizations in the relief area. There are no relief organizations that can single-handedly respond effectively to a major disaster; therefore the coordination both pre-disaster as well as post-disaster is vital for the effectiveness of the operation.
Humanitarian organizations are also constantly faced with scarce resources, little knowledge flow and uncertainty of the operation, which further motivates the aim for coordination between organizations. (Balcik, Beamon, Krejci, Muramatsu, and Ramirez, 2010). The business sector has also taken an interest in how humanitarian organizations tend to their logistics operations, as a major disaster might disrupt the global supply chains that many multinational corporations have today. This further motivates this research as it is in both private corporations as well as humanitarian organizations’ interest to effectively outline the existing barriers to coordination. 
1.1 Aim of research:
The difficulty to effective coordination is by no means a new phenomenon in the humanitarian aid community, there are several examples concerning material scarcity, ineffective knowledge or information flow, and differences in goals and perspectives (Balcik et al., 2010).   
This study seeks to outline the logistical aspects of relief operations in today’s disaster prone world. In light of the difficulties with achieving well coordinated operations, this paper seeks to further outline the major logistical barriers that relief organizations face when cooperating alongside other organizations in relief areas. While humanitarian aid can be researched as a field alone, this paper will focus on the logistical aspects connected to this field and not as such to the actual humanitarian aid that is given. Hence the barriers in humanitarian aid operations will only be measured from a logistical point of view.
1.2 Structure
This study is structured as follows. First, the area of interest is introduced after which the major problems are highlighted and discussed. Secondly, the theoretical framework and the data analysis tools are introduced, being followed by the actual research. The study concludes with an analysis of the findings from the research and the following conclusions. The study is concluded with a discussion of the findings and possible future development measures concerning the area of interest. 
1.3 Data collection:
The data will be collected through examining articles discussing humanitarian aid logistics international relief operations.  From these articles a literature review will be conducted and the logistical barriers highlighted. These barriers will then be presented and discussed from a logistical point of view in order to convey what impact they have on the relief operations. 
2.0 Method and theory discussion
2.1 Methodology
A qualitative research approach will be used in order to discuss and contemplate on the barriers in question. Applying stakeholder theory on the barriers found in the logistics literature, will convey any logistical implications the barriers have on relief operations. Stakeholder theory takes into account the different stakeholders, e.g. people that an organization affects or is affected by. It is further suitable for studying humanitarian logistics as it examines a particular organization not from its profit seeking potential but from its implications on the people that it works with. (Freeman & McVea, 1994)

2.2 Literature review:
The literature review that will function as a basis for this research is provided mainly from academic articles discussing humanitarian logistics operations. In addition to this, lectures and guest-lectures from the course Humanitarian Logistics by Gyöngyi Kovacs (2011), also discussing the aforementioned subject is also used. The academic articles are in turn gathered from a number of academic journals focusing on the area of interest. Primarily the following journals have been used; 
1. The Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management
2.  International Journal of Logistics: Research and Applications 
3. Supply Chain Management 
4. International Journal of Production Economics 
5. Journal of the Operational Research Society
The guest lecturers in question are Susanne Hertz from Jönköping International Business School, Sweden, and Paul D. Larson from the University of Manitoba, Canada.
2.3 Definitions
In order for this study to be more comprehensible, some key aspects should be properly defined and discussed. 
2.3.1 Disaster 
There are several definitions as to what a disaster is, and entails. van Wassenhove (2006) defines a disaster as “a disruption that physically affects a system as a whole and threatens its priorities and goals.”, The United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UN/ISDR) defines a disaster as: 
[. . .] a serious disruption of the functioning of society, posing a significant, widespread threat
to human life, health, property or the environment, whether caused by accident, nature or
human activity, and whether developing suddenly or as a result of complex, long-term processes.

This definition, while being somewhat longer and perhaps more difficult to comprehend is however more suitable for this study as it highlights the fact that the process is complex with many aspects to consider. Therefore it is the definition of the UN/ISDR that will be used in this study.
2.3.2 Humanitarian aid organizations
As mentioned earlier, some challenges linked to disaster relief logistics are created by the mere number of humanitarian aid organizations involved, these organizations range from supranational aid agencies and governmental organizations (GO) to non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and one-man non-governmental donors. There are also big international non-governmental organizations (BINGOs). These organizations differ in scale, local presence and mandates, and most importantly speed. The larger a humanitarian organization is the slower its supply chain will function. (Kovács & Spens, 2009).
Almost all aid organizations function accordingly to some form of pre-positioned principles which might hinder them from working together with other organizations or governments, as the actions of these partner organizations might not accord with the principles. This might not be considered as such a major barrier, but when considering that the major source of funds for these organization are based on donations from governments and private individuals, that are likeminded when it comes to these principles, the cooperative partner of an individual humanitarian aid organization must be chosen with this in mind. (Kovács & Spens, 2009)
2.3.3 Beneficiaries
A beneficiary is considered a person in need of urgent or long-term humanitarian aid in a disaster area. The beneficiary can be seen as the equivalence of a customer in business logistics, obviously with altering demands and needs. (Kovács, Lecture, 2011)
2.3.4 Differing features in Business and Humanitarian Logistics
Balcik and Beamon (2008) identify a number of crucial characteristics of humanitarian logistics that differ from business logistics; the unpredictability of demand, the suddenness of the demand occurrence, the high stakes associated with the timeliness of delivery, and the lack of resources. These features make this form of logistics operations very difficult to grasp in a larger aspect as the number of actors, beneficiaries and materials tend to blend together into a large entity without clear coordination. When comparing business and humanitarian logisticians it is fairly obvious that the later ones have far greater challenges in collaboration and coordination efforts. The great number of actors involved, both international and local, all with their own agendas and ways of operating, pose a major barrier. Relief operations are often described and criticized for their lack of collaboration, redundancies and duplicated efforts and materials. (Larson, lecture 2011)
2.3.5 Coordination 
There are several definitions for coordination. The broadest and also most comprehensible definition is “coordination is the act of working together” (Malone & Crowston, 1991). The coordination aspect in this paper is considered as the functional management and information flow within a supply chain of a humanitarian organization in a relief area. Essentially, it is the act of all the involved organizations working together in order to reach the beneficiary as effectively as possible. The coordination function is usually managed by some of the larger organizations, such as WFP (which specializes on logistics) or UNICEF. Coordination must not only be considered as the obedience of orders from the smaller humanitarian organizations, but rather the pro-active behavior of these organizations with an extensive information flow between the larger organizations and the smaller ones. Some direct benefits from effective coordination is; cost reductions in purchasing of material, risk reduction, access to resources, and  knowledge/learning sharing. 
3.0 Theoretical framework
3.1 Stakeholder theory
Stakeholder theory is originally an organizational management theory that addresses the need for business ethics, morals and company values in effective management of an organization. The focus of stakeholder theory is basically based on two main questions.  First the theory questions the purpose of the firm or organization; this gives incentive for the organization to pursue its goals as they have been outlined. Secondly, the theory questions what responsibility the management has to the organization’s stakeholders; this in turn motivates the management to manage the organization according to the established principles (Freeman, Wicks & Parmar, 2004). The stakeholder theory is applied to humanitarian logistics in the sense where the individual organization must consider all its stakeholders when making decisions on cooperation and coordination. This is in practice applied by assessing the different barriers discussed in the assessed academic journals and considering which barriers have the largest impact on the stakeholders. While the stakeholder theory is based on a business concept, the same stakeholders can be found in a humanitarian organization.

[Figure] 
3.2 Humanitarian Logistics	
Thomas and Mizushima (2005, p. 60) defined humanitarian logistics as “the process of planning, implementing, and controlling the efficient, cost-effective flow and storage of goods and materials, as well as related information, from the point of origin of consumption for the purpose of meeting the end beneficiary’s requirements”.  This definition can to almost all aspects be effectively compared to logistics in a business context. However, the actors involved in humanitarian logistics are not motivated by personal gain or profit, and the beneficiary e.g. “customer” is usually in a life threatening situation that does not give him/her the luxury of choosing between products. If these aspects are taken into consideration, the supply chain of a humanitarian aid operation differs quite remarkably from a supply chain in a business context. While the demand and supply usually is fairly easily definable in a business supply chain, the same cannot be said for a humanitarian supply chain as the products demand is created overnight or under a short time span with supplies usually being scarce and not easily accessible. (Kovacs & Spens, 2009)
While the field of implementation for humanitarian logistics focuses on a wide range of different disasters; earthquakes, tsunamis, hurricanes, epidemics, famines, terrorist attacks, and war situations, the differentiation is still somewhat unclear as to which organizations tend to which disaster most effectively and in what kind of combination. More over the causes, effects and scale of the disasters tend to differ in the same manner as the number of organizations involved in the mitigation. (Kovács & Spens, 2009)
The primary objective for humanitarian organizations is as discussed, to effectively provide aid and materials to people in disaster areas. This function is hindered foremost by the unpredictability of the demand, in terms of timing, location, type and size. While a disaster to some degree is predictable, the scale of the destruction of infrastructure and the impact on local populous is impossible to predict. A disaster can also occur very suddenly, for example an earthquake or a tsunami, which may lead to increased numbers of beneficiaries injured or killed. It can also leave the local relief organizations (which usually are the first ones to arrive at the disaster area) unable to function. The suddenness of a disaster also creates a large demand for supplies to a possibly inaccessible area where the beneficiaries’ lives are depending on the lead times of the relief organizations. (Kovács & Spens, 2009)
3.3 Challenges in Humanitarian Logistics
In this chapter the major challenges will be presented, as they have been discussed in the journals or lectures mentioned earlier in the text. These challenges are all related to humanitarian logistics and are considered as barriers of bigger or smaller proportions for effective coordination. In a broader sense the major barriers can be divided into five categories, as most barriers are in some way linked to these categories. The categories are; politics, ideologies, religions, bureaucracies, and competition of donors (Lecture, Hertz 2011). These categories will now be presented in a more detailed manner in order to properly describe the way they function as a barrier. 
3.3.1 Politics
The political situation in a relief area is always considered as an important factor, as it is for some organizations necessary for the disaster struck country to officially request assistance, before the organizations can enter the country in question. The unstable political situation in a country may lead to ineffective information flow or indecisiveness as to where the relief aid is needed. The whole operation can be disrupted by the political parties’ arguing about who should be in charge of coordination with aid organizations.  Another aspect of the politics involved in a relief operation, is the mandates that are necessary for the larger organizations, as they are not allowed into a country with a proper mandate. A political situation in the form of military conflicts is also something that affects and humanitarian operation. The presence of armed forces, works a double-edged sword, as the cooperation with the military may provide transportation and logistics services, but on the other hand the beneficiaries may not trust the military forces or any organizations working with them. (Hertz, Lecture, 2011)
3.3.2 Ideologies
Most humanitarian aid organizations function according to a set of principles and an ideology. These principles usually highlight aspects such as humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence. Many humanitarian organizations tend to not cooperate with the local military as this obviously would violate the principle of impartiality. The ideologies or principles of humanitarian aid organizations are dependent on the type of organization. Also these ideologies may even prevent some organizations from even entering a country where another organization is active. A prime example of distinctive and controlling ideologies is the independent organization Doctors Without Borders (Medecins Sans Frontieres) (MFS), which to a large extent is extremely cautious to cooperating with other aid organizations, and is unconditionally neutral in any relief operation. The choice of neutrality might be admirable to some extent but it also decreases the information flow of beneficiary needs to other organizations that might be able to deliver aid in other forms than medical care. (Kovács, Lecture 2011).
As a result of the principles that humanitarian organizations follow, a major barrier is presented in the conundrum, “how to keep your ideology and still cooperate?” . (Susanne Hertz, Lecture 2011)
3.3.3 Religions
The religious aspect of humanitarian aid is always very present as the religion of the beneficiary must be taken into account when providing relief aid. As an example stands the division of the International Committee of the Red Cross/Crescent (ICRC), depending on the majority of the beneficiaries in a country being either Christian or Muslim. While this division has been proven functional for the ICRC, other Christian or Muslim aid organizations may have some very strong ideologies based on their religions, which may hinder them from effectively reaching beneficiaries or cooperating with certain organizations.  (Hertz, Lecture, 2011)
3.3.4 Bureaucracies
Bureaucracy in humanitarian aid operations is an unfortunate reality that all organizations must endure. While organizations in developed countries might be used to an effective customs in their home country, the reality is something quite different as vital humanitarian aid material and goods might get stuck in customs procedures for days before they reach the beneficiaries just because of the bureaucracy involved. The situation will furthermore deteriorate with the enormous amounts of aid material that tend to be delivered at the same time from organizations across the world. It is for this reason that some aid organizations tend to stick to themselves as the find the process of customs declarations easier if they don’t have to think about other parties involved. (Hertz, Lecture 2011 & Kovács Lecture, 2011)
3.3.5 Competition of donors
The lifeline of most humanitarian organizations is the financial donations from private donors. These donations facilitate the ongoing procurement of relief material and keeping the organization functional. The donors usually tend to donate monetary or material aid to the humanitarian organizations that they can relate to, or the principles they can relate to. Under this premise of future donations, it is understandable that aid organizations tend to aim for both beneficiaries as well as donor satisfaction. Hence, the choice of coordination with other organizations is not only depending on the most effective logistical solution but also on the beneficiaries and donors. (Kovács, Lecture 2011)
4.0 Analysis of barrier implication on the stakeholder
The barriers presented in the previous chapter function on a fundamental level as a hinder for the individual stakeholder to the humanitarian organization. ……
 

