How purchasing management reinforce the business competitiveness of a firm

1. 
2. Introduction:
Recently, a so-called “electricity supplier price war”(2012), which was brought up by one of Chinese largest online retailers - Jingdong mall - happened among the 3 Chinese largest electricity retailers, Jingdong, Guomei and Suning, and it has raised a widespread concern in the whole community. In order to attract the attention of consumers and gain the popularity and market share of the company, these companies decided to cut prices for all of the products by a wide margin and compete who will keep offering the lowest price of the war. Generally, it was considered as a normal competition among companies, even if the prices of products have been reduced greatly; however, it is convinced firmly that the companies still have good profits to some extent. So who will be the winner in the end? This paper seeks to find the reasons of why these retailers dare to receive such a risky challenge and what factors ultimately determine the victory of the price war? 
An investment advisor in the retail industry pointed out that price war as one of the most direct, fastest, most effective means of competition, it fully reflected the comprehensive strength of the businesses, and especially the capability of a corporate’s supply chain management (Liu, 2012). Supply chain management is a decisive factor of the price war (Liu, 2012). That is to say, business with high efficient supply chain management capabilities is essential for a firm to be more competitive in the market. However, purchasing management as the priority part of the supply chain management definitely plays an important role in a successful business as well.
In the modern enterprise management, the functionality of purchasing management has become increasingly important. Firstly, costs of products or materials normally account for relatively large proportion (60%-70%) of the total costs of a corporate (Madison, 2007). So if the procurement costs can be managed and controlled well, then the firm will have more extra money to invest and develop other parts of the supply chain to enhance its business. Secondly, the purchasers or buyers are responsible for the evaluation of the materials and products they purchased in terms of price, quality, service, availability, reliability and so forth (Benton, 2010). Hence, a purchasing management will directly influence the continuity of the whole supply chain and the quality of the final products. Thirdly, purchasing management devotes enterprises to choose right suppliers and establish good communication and long-term partnership with suppliers (Benton, 2010), so that to provide the company a very strong and stable source base to pursue higher profits. All in all, the price war is eventually a test to supply chain management of a company; meanwhile, it is a test to purchasing management of this company as well. 
This paper aims to investigate how purchasing management will affect the whole supply chain of a company as well as a corporate business and its competitiveness in the market, and specify the importance of procurement and purchasing management in a good supply chain management. It will not highlight the functionality of supply chain management but will be mentioned and described. It will also give a case study to illustrate how an enterprise conducts purchasing management successfully in the procurement process.
This paper is organized in following way. After this introduction, the second part will be divided into two sections: 1) mainly identifying the key factors impacting on implementation of procurement management in purchasing process; 2) Clarifying the relationship between procurement and other parts of supply chain and displaying how the purchasing will be integrated with other parts of supply chain to improve the corporate competitiveness. The third section is followed by a case study about Volvo’s procurement strategies in order to analyze in which aspects should be concentrated on to implement the purchasing strategies successfully. Lastly, by evaluating the functions of purchasing management in the enterprise to gain a deeper understanding of the importance of implementing purchasing management and arouse other companies’ attention to concentrate on it. 
3. Methodology
A variety of existing documentation (literature books, publications, journals, internet, etc.) are evaluated and verified in order to provide the theory for the topic and confirm the used knowledge is correct. Documents referring to the purchasing management are available. Literature book “Purchasing and supply chain management” is used as the main reference to help to analyze the purchasing function in supply chain as well as the corporate business.
A case study about Volvo’s purchasing strategy was analyzed by having an interview with the manager of Global logistics, Per Dalheim. This will explain in which aspects should be concentrated on to implement the purchasing strategies successfully. While, it aims also to stress the importance of different purchasing strategies to a firm in contributing to the reduction of the overall costs and elimination of risks in purchasing process. 

4. Theory research
3.1 Analysis of purchasing process
From the example of price war mentioned before, it has indicated that implementing purchasing management successfully has great benefit on saving cost; meanwhile, it offers a strong basis for the business competitiveness in the fierce competitive market. However, a good purchasing management utilized well should be on the basis of the interaction among the each step of procurement process.   
A standard procurement process is included five steps. Firstly, defining the business needs. This means that the purchasers or the buyers must understand the fundamental and specific requirement to the company before starting the procurement. Secondly, developing the purchasing strategy, which is responsible for searching the market, looking for the potential solutions to meet the company’s requirements and selecting the suppliers, is seen as the significant part of the purchasing process. Whether the company will get the cost effectiveness, the goods will be delivered to the right place on time at the mutually agreeable terms, they all require a detailed and precise purchasing strategy. Thirdly, it should be selecting and evaluating the suppliers. There is no doubt that right suppliers have the capability to meet the company’s needs to ensure the whole operation of the company goes properly and smoothly. Take the electricity retailer Suning mall for example, it was said that one of the important reasons to receive the price war is that Suning mall is fairly confident to their suppliers. Additionally, negotiation and award is a step which directly connected with the company’s costs and other benefits. Negotiating a low-cost with a high-quality is always the objective of the company; while, it is definitely essential to sign a completely and clearly contract to ensure the correct quantity of products and product’s delivery time and all the other necessary information. Associate this with the price war again, the 3 largest retails dare to offer such low sales prices for most products, it is somewhat related to the buyers’ ability of negotiation. Last but not least is induction and integration. It refers to that after reaching the agreement with suppliers, the buyers have to keep tracking and reporting the purchased products to prevent any potential risks within the procurement process.

3.2 Relationship between purchasing management and supply chain management
After analyzing the five steps of purchasing process, it indicated that if an enterprise wants to implement a successful procurement management to work on their overall objective, each step within the purchasing process has to work with each other closely and be conducted carefully. Purchasing professionally will not only add value to organization in controlling supply costs, but also have large influence on the other parts of management in supply chain as well as the business of the firm.
3.2.1 Supply management
In the supply chain, it consists of three entities: customers, manufacturers and the producer’s suppliers. Whereas the supply chain management is for optimizing the processes of acquiring inputs from suppliers, converting those inputs into final products and then delivering to customers(Patrik 2008). Among them, purchasing management is responsible for the communication with suppliers to process the acquired inputs and ensure the finished goods can be transformed continuously to the customers.
Then the supply management should be considered as priority to integrate with the purchasing. Supply management exists to explore business opportunities and utilize supply strategies that deliver the possible value to the organization, its suppliers and its customers (Benton, 2010). It aims to control the transformation of raw materials and component parts into shipped or inventory goods to improve the competitive position and customer satisfaction.(Benton, 2010) Due to these reasons, the supply managers, buyers, and purchasing agents seek to get the highest-quality products at the lowest possible purchase cost for their employers.
In general, the purchasers buy goods and services for resale. They determine which commodities or services are the specific requirement satisfying the customers, choose the suppliers, negotiate the lowest price, and award contracts that guarantee the correct amount of the product or service is received at the appropriate time with good quality. In order to accomplish these tasks, it requires the purchasing managers, buyers, and purchasing agents could identify the potential suppliers no matter they are in foreign or in domestic. Furthermore, they also need to evaluate suppliers on the bases of price, quality, service support, availability, reliability, by researching their reputation and history, examining products and services, assessing a supplier’s production and distribution capabilities and other technical problems(Benton, 2010). Once all of the necessary information is confirmed, the purchasers will place the orders and award contracts to suppliers who meet their needs.
Integrated purchasing and supply management still conducts the cost analysis, transportation of the materials, inventory problems, quality problems etc. after procurement to ensure the products and services will be transferred and utilized in following process successfully.
3.2.2 Business strategy
The critical to implement the integrated supply management is the issue of business strategy. It is pointed out by Srivastava, “The purchasing actions designed to reinforce the firm’s competitive priorities can give the firm advantages over its competitors”. (Benton, 2010)
It indicates that either purchasing decisions or actions are determined by some certain factors which are corporate’s competitive priorities, its resource capabilities, the organization’s strengths and weaknesses as well as the competitive environment. So in the formulation of purchasing strategy, these factors must be considered (Benton, 2010).
The so called competitive priorities can be explained simply that the purchasing decision maker needs to very clear about what they are competing on in the market before procurement. For example, if a firm competes on cost, so the purchasing costs will be treated as the priority to drive the purchasing manager to take action that keep material costs low, but other criteria may be neglected. However, competitive priorities not always dominate the purchasing decision and action. If a manufactory competes on flexibility, then the lead time will be the primary requirement to the suppliers when buying products. The suppliers with short lead time give the manufactory the ability to respond to the customers or changing situations quickly, but it requests the manufactory carry more inventories to buffer against uncertainties. Inventory is an expensive alternative which in turn may raise the overall costs of the firm. As costs is always the dominant criterion in evaluating the performance of purchasing, hence, this example tells us that when making the purchasing strategy, other factors have to be taken into consideration as  well, irrespective of the competitive priority.
In a more comprehensive perspective, cost minimization may be the dominant objective in buying and has contributed a lot to increase the business competitiveness. But in today’s competitive business environment, the quality issue, delivery performance should also be regarded with the cost at the same time, which requires each part of the supply chain work together and keep consistent with each other to devote to strengthening the competitiveness of the firm. 

5. How to implement the purchasing strategies in a firm
As the purchasing plays an important role in an enterprise business, therefore, which aspects need to be focused on, or in other words, the company will use what sort of procurement strategies to ensure the purchasing process proceed smoothly. A research study made in Volvo may give some indications.

Purchasing strategy of Volvo
The purchasing strategies for Volvo are referred by Per Dalheim (manager of Global logistic in Volvo) in 3 parts. First is how to establish a good relationship with existing suppliers. Second, how to control purchasing cost to reduce the overall cost. Thirdly, evaluate the potential risks before purchasing and how to manage the risks.
Partnership
In terms of relationship between Volvo and their suppliers, the first thing of course is choosing right and reliable suppliers. For Volvo, they would like to work with those big reliable suppliers with large capacity and knowledge, and then establish a long-term partnership with suppliers. In order to establish the long-term and reliable co-operation, both the Volvo and its suppliers are inclined to trust each other entirely by sharing the relative information such as production ideas, price information and IT system information and so on.
Purchasing cost
Due to the reduction of purchasing cost, Per Dalheim mainly referred to 4 strategies. First, they outsourcing their components design work to their suppliers, because they are professional at design work and they know how to do to get high quality components with lowest cost. Then the total cost of purchasing components can be reduced to a large extent. However, this decision is also definitely depending on strong partnership between corporates. Second is reducing suppliers. It says that there is a policy in Volvo to reduce the number of suppliers. That is to say, focus on the big suppliers and get rid of the small suppliers. Because more suppliers means cost more on establishing relationship, such as IT charges, handle invoice charges, administrative cost and transportation cost. Third, in terms of transportation costs, the Volvo think that before sourcing the materials around the world, they have to consider variety factors like low labor cost, low-cost material, inventory costs etc. together with the transportation fee. These must be planned comprehensively ahead to reach the lowest costs. Lastly, Volvo says negotiation is always the direct and efficient way to reduce the purchasing cost.
Risk management
It is significant to evaluate any potential risks when planning the purchasing to eliminate or minimize risks during the procurement process. In production sites, when new parts are produced, the purchaser is very much involved. The changes of design are inevitable, and it affects the cost as well. In this phase, the purchaser can negotiate to control the cost and ensure the design and the quality is appropriate. For instance, they can take some samples back and test whether the dimension or other properties are right. However, once the supplier start manufacturing, then the buyers could not be involved even problems occur. If there are quality problem, there will be the plant taking care of it, but the purchaser should be brought in and help contact suppliers to find and solve the problems together with Volvo. In addition to that, Per Dalheim stressed that a valid and legal contract is the big insurance to protect both parts benefits and choosing the right suppliers is the key part of minimizing the purchasing risk.

All the strategies that Volvo referred above are the three important parts of purchasing strategy. I think that no matter what kind of enterprise is or whatever the products they produced, establishing the partnership, reducing purchasing cost and conducting the risk management cannot be neglected by the firms. These have the same function for those electricity retailers in the price war. Assume that they did not have good and strong relationship, with their vendors, how can they survive from the large daily sales in hundreds areas without continuous supplying resources. If they did not have an enough strict risk management, how could they ensure the quality of the products, and how could they dare to challenge the price war happened unexpected.
Obviously, it is not enough to only use these 3 strategies. Evaluating and optimizing the vendors, carrying out the quality management, choosing the right sourcing strategies are all necessary for a company to conduct. All in all, each company has to make a proper purchasing strategies relying on their own company’s conditions. Integrate each internal strategy and consistent purchasing with other parts of the company to strive for and realize the maximum profit for the enterprise.



6. Discussion and conclusion
In today’s turbulent supply markets, professional purchasing is expected to be developed and help business units remain competitive. But only managing an action cannot achieve the goal. It is suggested that there should be more comprehensive integration of the purchasing function with the strategic and competitive goals of a firm. There is no single strategic goal for any competitive firm. Cost minimization is not always the only goal that the company pursues. In turn, high-quality pursuing, reliable delivery performances, advanced IT system are goals for a competitive firm seek to reach as well. As a result, purchasing is only a function part to contribute to improvement of the business competitiveness. Linkages between purchasing decisions and firm’s other competitive strategies is the trend and the key to formulate a competitive company and win a position in the market.
In the price war, purchasing management definitely provides a strong bases to the electricity retailers, and its functionality cannot be neglected when evaluating the performance of each corporate; nevertheless, a firm could not survive by only implementing  the purchasing management, it still needs an integrated work within each function of the firm and external partners. 
