 FEASIBILITY STUDY OF BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY

1. Introduction
In China, knowledge about Finland is limited at Scandinavian country, together with
some distinguishing images such as Santa Clause and Nokia.

There are not many Chinese come to Finland and settle down in the country for longer
period compared with the population Chinese have in other countries. On the other hand,
to the writer's knowledge, Finnish culture has not been promoted by any non-
governmental organization up to now. There is inner-connection between those
mentioned facts, which has impact on causing the vague image of Finland among
Chinese.

Six years in Finland allows the writer to gain opportunities to familiarise with Finland,
and to acquire distinguishing features of the country. The writer appreciates typically
lifestyle and attitude of Finns.

1.1. Purpose
The purpose of the study is to evaluate feasibility of the business idea, and come up
with practical solutions for it.

1.2. Objectives
The writer determines to carry on the business idea to practice so as to promote Finland
and its distinguishing features to people in China, especially those in Shanghai, in the
café ­ Café Suomi; more importantly, the café can bring financial profitability to the
writer.

1.3. Structure
In the study, the writer will identify the business and its opportunities in chapter 2; in
chapter 3, theoretical framework is given to emphasize the business followed by
analysis of feasibility categories in chapter 4, which includes product/service,
market/industry, financial issues, and organization feasibility; in chapter 5, the writer
will have a discussion about analysis; last but not least, summary and conclusion are
conducted in chapter 6.

2. Business in brief
The business is defined in four phases fundamentally: Café as elementary level, Café
along with distinguishing Finnish features in intermediate level, and information
services as well as in-store demonstration are added up in advanced level; for long-term
period, the writer intends to make Café Suomi to be a Themed/Branding House with the
functions of encouraging people to spend their leisure time but also being the
representative media for marketing activities about Finland in Shanghai even in China.
Companies will be able to utilize Café Suomi as platform to test business opportunities,
for instance, expansion, and merge investment, before entering into the massive Chinese
market.

The writer understands this as business opportunity due to her business background and
enthusiasms to Finland. She believes that the business can turn to be profitable in short
period, and promote Finland through non-organizational channels.




3. Method

3.1. Brand positioning
Positioning the brand has been long acknowledged as a core branding activity. This
involves selecting specific attributes with which it is desirable for the brand to be
associated. The marketing/brand manager then develops a plan to establish and/or
strengthen this association via marketing communications. (Romaniuk 2001)

3.2. Feasibility study
A feasibility study aligns the findings with functional processes of an enterprise which
an audience can easily understand. (Thompson 2003a). It provides the stakeholders with
varying degrees of evidence that a business concept will in fact be viable (Hoagland and
Williamson 2000; Thompson 2003c; Thompson 2003a; Wickham 2004).




4. Analysis

4.1. Product/Service

The analysis begins with introducing the arrangement of business by describing
products offered and displayed in Café Suomi, its related services, and functions at
different stages.

Phase 1: Café

The core business is café. It serves coffee products from Finland i.e. Paulig. In addition,
Café Suomi offers various refreshment products from Fazer i.e. chocolate, biscuits,
confectionery and bakeries.

Phase 2: Café, Container/Vessel/Decoration

Apart from Phase 1, coffee products and refreshments will be carried by Iittala and
Arabia, which have products for eating, drinking, cooking and decorating.

Phase 3: Café, Container/Vessel/Decoration, Finnish distinguishing features

Besides Phase 2, some distinguishing features will be either displayed or used in the
cafeteria. Moomin, Marimekko, and Finnish designs will be presented.

Phase 4: Café, Container/Vessel/Decoration, Finnish distinguishing features,
Information Services/In-store demonstration

In Phase 4, information services will be added to value proposition. Information related
to Finland will be displayed. It contains general information about Finland, tourism
information, Finnish education, and Finnish representative brands.

The theme of the café will be elements of Finland, therefore, it only serves stuff
represent Finland or from the country.

Moreover, adaptions to local business environment and consumer needs are necessary.
Proportion in different food and drink products will be adjusted to appropriate local
preferences. In addition, size of products will be adapted according to the requirements
of local people.




4.2. Market/Industry
The writer will discuss the market of the business, outlining how it should be sold. It is
valuable to understand current market and related consumer base before entering the
market. Planning on brand positioning and marketing activities need to be considered as
well.

4.2.1. City background
Shanghai is one of the largest cities by population in China with a total population of
over 23 million as of 2010. With the rapid development, it becomes a global city and
financial center, with significant influence in commerce, culture, finance, fashion, and
so forth. Shanghai is located in the Yangtze River Delta in estern China, in the middle
portion of the Chinese coast. Due to the favorable location, Shanghai was one of the
cities opened to foreign trade in 1842. The city flourished as a center of commerce
between east and west, and become a multinational hub of finance and business since
the 1930s. In addition, Shanghai is also a popular tourist destination. The factors make
the city to be easy to adapt. Today, Shanghai is one of the most prosperous cities in the
world. Its cosmopolitan character, sophisticated and affluent consumers, and highly
educated skilled labor force make it highly attractive to overseas investors.

4.2.2. Younger generation
Michael Stanat wrote in his book(Homa & Sekey Books 2005): By the year 2020, China
is expected to become the second largest economy in the world, developing into a vast
consumer market with a sizeable middle class. On every newsstand sits a magazine
issue on China fever. Yet even after The Reform Era in China, little is known about
China's Generation Y, consisting of approximately 200 million young individuals born
between 1980 and 1989.

The consuming capability of younger generation becomes stronger, which helps
stimulate economic growth. They have money for their disposals and are willing to
spend if the products/services match their personal positions and images. Therefore,
demanding for theme café such as Café Suomi will be a hit for the market. Café Suomi
delivers experience to customers as described below that is where value comes from.

4.2.3. Target segment
The café targets younger generation, 20-35 year-old ascending middle class who are
sophisticated and have disposable income. They pay attention to quality and want to
enjoy life with a little bit of the indulgence life.

On the other hand, earn face is important for Chinese people by having high-end and
well-known stuff. And people are willing to show off to earn face. Cafe Suomi will
make use of this characteristic to attract customers.




4.3. Marketing activities
Communication is vital in business. The business communication of marketing
activities includes advertising, public relations, personal selling, and any form of
communication between the firm and the consumer.

The writer is certainly not the `first mover' of this kind of business but it is believed to
be the first one who brings Finnish elements to Shanghai via non-governmental channel.
Therefore, differentiation and creative will be selling points. Scandinavia characters
such as taste, decoration, ingredients, and attitude are emphasized as different spheres to
customers in Shanghai. Nowadays people in Shanghai are busy in working and
improving financial conditions so that they forget to make kindly break sometimes.
Café Suomi aims to be presented as a place where people can relieve and get more
information about the country, and perhaps will visit it later, or bring mutual benefits to
both countries from various areas.

4.3.1. Convenience
With the rise of internet and hybrid models of information gathering and exchanging as
well sharing, consumers takes convenience into account which means the ease of
buying the product as well as finding the product and its information.

- Location

Finding business location is crucial. There will be merely the café located in city centre
area. It can be either in or around big shopping malls or quiet block so as to reinforce
the super-premium image. The only channel people can buy or perceive products is
from the café in where it is the ideal environment customers can experience everything
from Finland.

- Information finding

People can find information about Café Suomi and all the things presented in the store
from internet. Moreover, the writer will utilize various channels to promote, e.g. official
website, social media (renren, kaixin, sinaweibo and etc.), and personal blogs.
                                           
4.3.2. Brand positioning
Country of origin may affect the image of Café Suomi favorably. When an association
is favorable, the country of origin may be emphasized. There will be diffusion of the
concept, and moreover, the brand which carries the concept.

Social class is going to be used in the positioning of Café Suomi. Up-ward pull
marketing, involves positioning the café for mainstream consumers but portraying it as
being consumed by upper class consumers. Café Suomi will be careful when selecting
elements including surroundings, decorations and etc, to portray upscale living.

4.3.3. Promotion
TV exposure: There is a famous TV channel in Shanghai. Its target audience is younger
generation with the ages from 15 to 35 years old who keep updated about fashion and
are willing to pay for that. The writer will get contact with the channel and it's the most
popular TV program, obtaining an opportunity to have an interview and making video
clips to introduce Café Suomi.

Word of mouth: Spread the messages to Chinese who live in Finland as much as
possible, especially to those people who are from Shanghai, giving out updated
information from social media. On the other hand, send electronic vouchers to those
people and encourage them to visit the café when they go back Shanghai. In addition,
ask them to give those vouchers to their friends, especially those in Shanghai. Moreover,
the vouchers will be given to international people, especially Finns, encouraging them
to check out the café when they visit Shanghai, giving them the opportunity to
experience things from home country when they are abroad. In addition, there is an
association for Finnish people who live in Shanghai which is called Shanghain
Suomalaisten. The writer will pay much attention to it and eatablish relationship with
the association, encouraging those Finns in Shanghai to visit the place and make
contributions.

4.3.4. Competitors
Nestle and Unilever are two of the biggest competitors. The writer will have further
investigation in this part.

4.3.5. Best practices
Häägen-Dazs is a typical case. It has only been in China for 15 years, but it has already
been the No.2 foreign market in its business. According to CNN money, in China alone,

Häagen-Dazs last year brought in revenue of about $100 million. In the last three years
there, Häagen-Dazs has grown at an annualized rate of 21% (CNN MONEY). Evian,
Zara and IKEA are also some of the best practices which will be studied by the writer
for further investigation.

4.4. Financial issues
Financial part is crucial in every business. In this section, the writer will illustrate
general revenue and cost, i.e. how money will be used and how it can be accumulated.
Cost comes always early than revenue, thus it is necessary to be aware of it and check it
time to time so that plan can be adjusted and reactions can be done regarding to
business conditions.

The business has the principle of making a large margin on each unit it sells and settling
for fewer volumes. On the other hand, the writer will maximize captial by having
supports from funding, affiliating and sponsoring.

Cash budget will be listed at the beginning of every month, and accounts will be settled
by the end of the month. In addition, observe the cash flow and expenditure from time
to time.

Product and material, rent and insurances, salaries, marketing materials, travel costs,
taxes, investment, accounting, and legal advice and other expert services as well as
phone and office expenses are primary issues concerned in business, which depend on
local business situations, varied by economic conditions. The writer is going to make a
seperated plan for that. Therefore, basic calculations will be made in this study.

4.4.1. Product and material
Most of the products and raw materials will be shipped from supplier companies in
Finland if they cannot be found in Shanghai from those original companies. Seth Gordin
(2005) stated in his book that raw material shares small part of the cost along with
working labor, shipping. However, retailers have good shares on it. Therefore, try to get
materials and products from manufacturer companies will minimize fixed prices for
daily operation. The final price to consumers will still keep higher than normal café,
thus, the margin will be better. For instance, due to the fact that raw material will be
cheaper than end-products, therefore, coffee bean will be shipped so that they can be
processed in the cafeteria and made to cups of coffee by coffee makers bought in
Shanghai.

4.4.2 Rent
Rent depends on different district and type of places. The rent of the place is ranged
from 2000 euros to 4000 eurosn per month.

4.4.3. Insurance
It various at different companies and will be decided later on.

4.4.4. Salaries
Everyone who works for the café will have salary including the writer. The writer will
get approximately 300 euros per month which is standard for university graduates in
Shanghai. Those employees who work in the café will get similar salaries as the writer.

4.4.5. Marketing activities
Marketing will be done via social media channels, thus, word of mouth will be one of
the major channels which means marketing cost will be lower. Nevertheless, business
treatments will be major part in the activities. It will cost 1000 euros per month at the
first half year.

4.4.6. Travel costs
Since the business is between Finland and China, the writer will travel between Finland
and Shanghai at least 3 times a year, which means 3 times in 600 euros, i.e. 1800 euros
per year.

4.4.7. Investment
It is main sources of captial in this businss. Government and company assistance will be
the way to attain.

4.4.8. Other expenditures
Other expenditures such as taxes, accounting, and legal advice and other expert services
vary from locals. Thus, it will be investigated later.

4.4.9. Revenue
Selling products will be the source of revenue in daily business. Furthermore, when
Cafe Suomi gain reputation and establish brand equity, companies want to do marketing
activities in Cafe Suomi will pay for that, which is another revenue for business.

4.5. Organizational feasibility
The writer will describe the organization structure in the section.

The founder of Café Suomi is the writer who is in charge of most of the business at the
very beginning. She will contact all kinds of companies and organizations.

Business partners help to deal with business contacts and information fulfilment as well
as set up appointments.

There will be 2-3 person hired in the café, making products, taking care of customers
and introducing related issues. It is not necessary for them to have uniform but they will
be required to present products from Finland such as Marimekko products or some
accessories.


5. Discussion
This is the first draft of feasibility study of the Cafe Suomi. Further modification,
research and investigation will be carried out based on the original one later on.
Consumer behaviours and their consuming patterns are different from Europe. It cannot
be explained clearly in short pages. However, it is going to be one of the key elements
in achieving business success. In addition, financial part will be specified to detail. The
writer will have other studies for related topics to help investors to gain better
understanding.

There are also useful links to assist the writer to process business idea into practice.





6. Summary and Conclusion
