The use of video in online marketing


1    INTRODUCTION

The use of video in online marketing has experienced a rapid growth over the last
decade or so mainly due to technological advances. Klejna (2011:36) states that in 2011
the spending in online video advertisement is expected to grow to $2.1 billion. The
dynamic growth of the industry, as well as its cost-efficiency, makes it an increasingly
important medium for marketers to explore (New Media Age 2004; Miller 2007).

There has been extensive research into what kind of a platform the Internet provides
for viewing animated material (e.g. Kuisma, Simola, Uusitalo, and Öörni 2010), as well
as about the use of video specifically in online marketing. The approach is often a
managerial one, where the issue is approached from the "how-to" angle. The questions
being asked are, for instance: "how to get consumer to pay attention to online video
advertising," or: "how to increase the click-through rates of online video ads."

In addition to often having a managerial approach, the articles in this field are often
single-issue articles. In other words, online marketing articles in general focus on
analysing a particular issue within this field, such as animation, attitudes, recall,
interactivity, experiences, attention, and such (see e.g. Hoffmann and Novak 1996;
Coyle and Thorson 2001; Kuisma et al 2010).

There is, however, very little research that brings together knowledge from the different
angles related to online video marketing. The overall goal of this study is to accumulate
some of the collective knowledge about the use of video in online marketing, and
analyze its current status through a content analysis.

Firstly, the aim is to provide a comprehensive look into what is meant by online video
advertising; this is done through a literature review. Secondly, there will be an
examination of what online video advertising, also known as viral video marketing,
looks like today by conducting a content analysis. In the analysis, the content of the 10
of most popular online viral advertisement will be carefully analyzed. The ultimate goal
is to give the reader a thorough view into the world online video marketing. There
exists very little, if any, prior research where this kind of compilation has been
administered within one study.

The study is arranged as follows: after the introduction, the second chapter includes the
literature review. The third chapter includes the content analysis of the chosen viral
advertisements. In the fourth and final chapter, a discussion about the results and their
limitations is enclosed.



2      LITERATURE REVIEW

In this chapter, the literature review in regards to interactive online marketing and the
use of online video are included. This chapter aims to acquaint the reader with the
origins and evolution of online video with a focus on marketing.


2.1.   Video in online marketing

When the Internet first started to become popular amongst mass audiences, the
possibilities it offered to marketers seemed endless, even revolutionary, according to
some early research (e.g. Hoffman and Novak 1996). What was revolutionary about the
World Wide Web was, that is was changing the way in which companies could
communicate with their customers. Up to this stage, the way companies carried out
their communications was with an orientation to masses (Hoffman and Novak 1996).
In other words, a firm would design a standardized marketing message, or content, and
choose a mass media outlet (e.g. TV) through which the content would be distributed to
a mass audience (see Figure 1).

[Figure]

With the introduction of the Internet, the mass-approach started to change radically.
Developing online technology allowed communication to evolve from the "one-to-many
model" to a more interpersonal, interactive, and two-way model, or as Hoffman and
Novak (1996) describe it: "many-to-many model" (see Figure 2).


[Figure]

Even though the Internet seemed to offer endless marketing possibilities, there was
also some scepticism about the effectiveness of the new, interactive medium. Some
academics questioned whether the new medium was, in fact, superior to standard
marketing formats, or just an overly hyped phenomenon (e.g. Bezjian-Avery, Calder,
and Iacobucci 1998). Technology played a quite important part in this discussion; still
in the 1990's ­ compared to today ­ the Internet was still in its infancy in the ability to
show, for example, online videos. Most Internet users were still using dial-up
connections, which were quite slow and not able to handle large amounts of
information at once. Hence, the use of, for instance, animated content in marketing was
often seen detrimental to the success of the marketed content simply because the
medium was not able the support such rich information design.

The shift forward both in academic discussion and consumer opinions came with the
introduction of new technologies, such as broadband connections and improved
computer capabilities (e.g. faster and increasingly efficient laptops and desktops). From
early 2000's onwards, it is noticeable that marketing-related scholarly discussion
moved from discussing the nature of the Internet, and if it should be used in marketing,
to how it should be used (e.g. Papacharissi and Rubin 2000; Dijkstra, Buijtels, and van
Raaij 2005; Jensen 2008; Klejna 2011).

The technological developments also facilitated the growth of the internet video
market. Although online videos existed already in the 1990's (Bezjian-Avery et al.
1998), the explosive growth of the Internet video did not take place until the
technological developments enabled its extensive and effective use.

Today, the market continues to grow: based on a survey conducted in 2007 (Reynolds
2010, p. 242), where 235 interactive marketers were asked "in the next three years, do
you think marketing's effectiveness will increase, stay the same, or decrease in... the
following media?" approximately 85% of the respondents thought that the effectiveness
of online video would increase, ranking it the 4th effectiveness increasing media after
social media, search engine marketing, and mobile. Furthemore, Klejna (2011:36)
estimated that in 2011, the online video advertising spending would amount to over 2.1
billion US dollars. Thus, it is quite evident that within the marketing discipline, online
video advertising has become a key issue.

There are many different uses of online video advertising in existence today, such as
pre/post-roll video, animated banners, and viral videos. Some employ techniques from
more traditional media. For example, the video commercials often seen in the
beginning, in the middle, or at the end of another video that a consumer is watching,
also known as linear in-stream advertisements (Klejna 2011), are types of videos that
use similar advertising tactics than traditional TV advertising. Especially in the infancy
of the online video market, these types of videos were typically used as their content
and style was easily adoptable from the traditional marketing paradigm.

However, there has been some criticism against using the so-called "one-way"
traditional advertising approaches in the virtual world, because of their suggested
unsuitability for the Internet, which is seen as an interactive "two-way" medium; also,
such advertisement are seen to disrupt the experienced freedom of the Internet (i.e. the
freedom to choose to view, or not to view, particular content) that is one of its defining
characteristics (e.g. Liu and Shrum 2002; Wu 2006).

Due to the criticism of using traditional advertising techniques on the Internet, and the
increased realizations of its opportunities as a creative medium (Hampp 2011),
marketers have approached the issue in other ways. Perhaps one of the most popular
approaches to online video in the recent years has been the utilization of the viral video.
                                           



Viral videos are videos that companies create for marketing purposes, often with funny
or clever content, that become popular by people sharing them with each other through
email, blogs, YouTube, and other social media websites (Broxton, Interian, Vaver, and
Wattenhofer 2011). Armstrong and Kotler (as cited in Kulp 2007), define viral
marketing as "the internet version of word-of-mouth marketing--e-mail messages or
other marketing events that are so infectious that customers will want to pass them
along to friends."

Viral videos have become to represent one of the most, if not the most, popular
advertising techniques used in viral marketing campaigns currently (Cruz and Fill
2008). Thus, because of their increasing importance within the marketing, and
particularly e-marketing paradigm, popular viral videos have been chosen as the
subject of the content analysis, which is included in next chapter.




3      CONTENT ANALYSIS

This chapter includes the content analysis of the 10 most viewed online viral
advertisements as listed by Advertising Age. The chapter begins with an explanation of
the chosen videos and continues with the analysis of the content.


3.1.   Choice of content

The content chosen for this analysis originated from an article in the magazine
Advertising Age (September 2010). The article lists the 10 most viewed viral ad
campaign of all time (up to 2010). The list has been compiled based on unique views,
which refers to the times a viral video has been watched in total; unique views are
irrespective to how many times a single user has watched it (businessdictionary.com).

The videos chosen for the analysis are (brand ­ name of the commercial ­ how many
total views):

1. Blendtec ­ Will It Blend ­ 134.2 million views
2. Evian ­ Live Young ­ 103.9 million views
3. Old Spice ­ Responses ­ 57.1 million views
4. Pepsi ­ Gladiator ­ 46.7 million views
5. Microsoft ­ Xbox Project Natal ­ 42.7 million views
6. Dove ­ Evolution ­ 41.1 million views
7. T-Mobile ­ T-Mobile Dance - 35.5 million views
8. Doritos ­ Crash the Super Bowl 2010 ­ 34.2 million views
9. Old Spice ­ Odor Blocker ­ 34 million views
10. DC Shoes ­ Gymkhana Two ­ 32.9 million views


3.2. Analysis of content

Like mentioned above, there were all together 10 viral videos whose content will be
analyzed in this chapter. Table 1 includes the description of each commercial, their
duration, and their style.


[Table]


As we can see from the table, this group of videos is quite heterogeneous in content, in
length, and in style. Humor, however, seems to be a connecting factor. Humor was a
central style theme in 4 out of 10 videos. Perhaps due to the fact that most of these
commercials are by American companies, the humor is very forward, even deliberately
underlining, as opposed to being the more British-type, subtle humor.

Cleverness is another unifying characteristic in regards to some of the videos. There
seems to be something clever and attention capturing about many of the videos, which
usually comes from a good story line, great editing, and the skillful use of music. For
example, in the Evian "Live Young" video, the content might not be as funny if the song
"Rapper's Delight" by the Sugar Hill Gang was not playing in the background.

A quite perplexing feature that most of the videos (6/10) seems to have in common, is
that they are TV commercial-like in their content, and how the content is presented to
the viewer. This is an unexpected result, because research would suggest, that those
viral videos where the brand is not the focal point of the commercial are the most
successful. Hampp (2011) states that: "Lightly branded videos that function as
standalone content were found to be four times more effective than heavily branded
videos and 10 times more effective than clips with a call to action." This content
analysis disagrees with this finding, because in most of the videos the brand is at the
center of the commercial and quite heavily promoted.

Regarding the length of the viral videos, most of the videos are approximately 2
minutes in length; all together 6 out of 10 videos are under 2 minutes. However, the
length of the videos varies from 30 seconds to over 7 minutes. Thus, there seems to be
no standard to the length of online advertising videos. This says something about the
unrestricted nature of the medium; most TV commercials tend to be quite short as
commercial breaks need to include multiple commercials in a span of about 5 minutes
or so ­ online videos are not bound by this limitation.

Overall, the Internet as a medium offers an advertiser quite much freedom, not only
regards to the length of online videos, but also their creative content; it is also cost-
effective. Any company, either small or multinational, can produce clever content on
YouTube, for example, and get millions of views within weeks. This is not possible with
traditional mass marketing where a two-week TV campaign might cost hundreds of
thousands. As we can see from the top 10 viral video list, any kind of online content can
reach a gigantic number of views within a relatively limited time span; according to the
Advertising Age article, most of the videos were published after 2009, with the
exception of two videos published in 2006 and one in 2004.

In regards to the creative content, the videos on the list highlight the fact that the
content of an online video can be highly varying. For example, the T-Mobile video can
be considered as quite "viral-esque" meaning that it shows real people in a real
environment with something extraordinary taking place in this everyday setting. The
DC Shoes video, on the other hand, has a "reality" approach as well but the ad is
structured similarly to a mini-documentary with people in the video making comments
about the surrounding events. Furthermore, the Blendtech video takes a subtle jab at
infomercials; the Pepsi video relies strongly on the celebrity power of the singers
Britney Spears, Pink, Beyonce and Enrique Inglesias; the Old Spice commercials
feature ex-NFL football players in the shower ­ it seems that in a viral video, almost
anything goes.




4     DISCUSSION

Based on this content analysis, it can be stated that viral videos are highly varying in
regards to their length, content, and style. This underlines something about the
medium where they are presented; for a marketer, the Internet offers creative
opportunities that are not available in traditional media. Humour and cleverness,
however, seem to be two universal features found in many viral videos. According to
Advertising Age, humour is a theme that seems to cross cultures and the reason it is
often applied to viral videos.
                                          

The key issue when it comes to viral videos seems to be the creation of highly clever and
universally appealing content. Hampp (2011) notes that when designing a viral video, a
company should pick a creative concept with the ultimate intention of grab attention,
and grabbing attention quickly; "Stories and videos that gain traction in social media do
so quickly, often within hours of initial reports, and they fade quickly as well." (Broxton
et al. 2011) However, some videos ­ perhaps the ones that become the so-called classics
­ have staying power like the videos on the top 10 list indicate. The Pepsi video was
made in 2004 and it is still one of the most watched viral videos of all time.

It must be stated that even though viral videos can be immensely popular, as the top 10
videos indicate, not all viral videos, in fact, go viral. This is one of the disadvantages of
using viral videos in marketing; the marketer has little control over whether the content
is going to become popular or not. Watts, Peretti, and Frumin note that "For every high
profile example of a viral product, there are many unsuccessful attempts that one never
hears about... After the fact, it is usually possible to understand what was entertaining,
titillating, or otherwise intriguing about a given viral entity; but it is rarely obvious in
advance."


4.1.   Limitations

The Doritos commercial "Crash the Super Bowl" was not available for viewing at the
time of the content analysis.
