A Qualitative Study on Fairness Factors in Service Recovery 

1. Introduction
Although companies strive against errors or breakdowns during service delivery, it is still inevitable that service failures do happen in the service processes. With customers' increasing ability to influence others, any service failure, if not well handled, can become a disaster for service providers. According to one study,  customers who were satisfied with a firm’s recovery efforts told an average of 7 people, whereas those customers who were dissatisfied with the response told an average of 25 people (Granier et al, 2004). It is widely accepted that the cost of attracting a new customer substantially exceeds the cost of retaining an existing customer ( Kotler et al., 2003). Therefore, it is important for companies to design and manage service recovery process so that they can build long-term relationships with existing customers. 
Most of the previous studies refer to building theories describing service recovery processes or concerns to how to restore consumer satisfaction(Tax and Brown,1998, Bansal and Taylor,1999,Seawright et al.,2007,Swanson,2001), but it is still unclear how customers evaluate the recovery process, or how fairness factors intertwined to influence customer satisfaction. 
Based on the three fairness themes in service recovery proposed by Wilson et al.(2008), this study aims to explore how the three fairness dimensions work and affect the outcomes of service recovery. To achieve this goal, this paper examines the following questions: what do customers expect when they complain; how do customers perceive justice in the service recovery process; and how does a service recovery, successful or unsuccessful, affect the relationships between customer and the service provider? 
To achieve these objectives, the article is structured as follows. First we will briefly introduce two important theories we adopted in this paper. Then the methodology of the empirical study, which involves the presentation of the interview guide and data collection. The third part contains the summary of the interviews as well as the discussion about the data analyses. Finally, I will conclude with managerial implications of the findings and suggest some directions for further research.
2.Theoretician framework
2.1 Service recovery effects
Service recovery refers to the actions taken by an organization in response to a service failure(Wilson et al.,2008). Service failure occur for all kins of reasons, the service may be unavailable when promised, it may be delivered late or too slow, the outcome may be incorrect or poorly executed or employees may be rude or uncaring(Wilson et al.,2008).
Companies have realized that attracting a new customer costs much more than retaining an existing customer, this means if companies can implement effective service recovery strategies, they are more likely to keep a long-term relationship with their customers in a cost-effective way.Previous studies have shown that resolving customer problems effectively has a strong impact on customer satisfaction, loyalty, world-of-mouth communication and bottom-line performance(Wilson et al.,2008).
Unfortunately, many firms do not employ effective recovery strategies. Studies have shown that as many as half of businesses' responses to problems actually intensify—rather than mitigate—customers' negative feelings toward the organization(HarHart et al.,1990). While a good service recovery design can significantly enhance a customer's perceptions of the quality of products or services already purchased, the organization's competence, and the value of the organization's other offerings(Zemke and Bell,1990).
Swanson(2001) have categorized service recovery outcomes into four types, including two evaluative outcomes and two behaviour outcomes. The evaluative outcomes are perceived service quality and customer satisfaction. Perceived service quality refers to technical quality and process or functional quality. The former related to what is delivered, and is judged by the customer after the service is performed. The latter relates to the experience that a customer has while the need is being met. Customer satisfaction concerns the level of "consumption-related fulfillment"(Oliver, 1997). Word-of-mouth intentions and repurchase intentions are the two behavior outcomes of service failure encounter. Customers' word-of-mouth may appears as talking to others about the experiences, complaining to service providers or through third parties, such as the Internet. After service recovery, customers choose to stay or switch to another service provider.  
"The past studies are more focus on the selection and application of service recovery strategies after service failure" (Lin,2009) and exploring the the types of service failure and compensation. Previous studies concerning fairness effects usually try to measure fairness factors' influence to recovery outcomes by testing hypotheses through quantitative research or mathematical models. This study aims to supplement how the perceived justice affect customers' perceptions on service recovery through a qualitative way, which enables us to view the service recovery processes from a customer's perspective.
2.2 Customers' recovery expectation and fairness factors
Tax et al.(1998) documented three dimensions of justices which help to understand customers' complaint process from initiation to completion. They argued that customers are looking for distributive justice, procedural justice, and interactional justice. In another study, they used the term "outcome fairness", "procedural fairness", and "interactional fairness" correspondingly. Wilson et al.(2008) explained the three dimensions of fairness in a more specific way. "Outcome justice concerns the results that customers receive from their complaints, procedural justice refers to the policies, rules, and timeliness of the complaint process, and interactional justice focuses on the interpersonal treatment received during the complaint process"(Wilson et al.,2008) .
[Table]
 Outcome fairness concerns the outcome or compensations customers expect to match the service failure they experienced. The compensations can take form of actual monetary compensation, an apology, future free services, reduced charges, repair or replacement(Wilson et al.,2008). Customers use equity principle consciously or unconsciously to evaluate whether companies have paid for their failures. They want the companies to pay for the mistakes, and they expect similar treatment with those who had experienced the same failures before. Tax et al.(1998) stated that customers may assess the fairness of compensation differently on the basis of their prior experiences with the company in case, other people's similar experiences, and their perceptions about the lose resulted by the service failure. 
Procedural fairness refers to the policies, rules, and timeliness of the complaint process. Customers want easy access to complain and they want their problems to be solved as soon as possible. Customers are more likely to feel satisfied if their problems can be addressed by the first service person they complained to, and if the company can take customers' individual circumstances into consideration. "Fair procedures are characterised by clarity, speed, and absence of difficulties. Unfair procedures are those that customers perceive as slow, prolonged and inconvenient"(Wilson et al.,2008). 
During the complaint process, customers also expect interactional fairness, which concerns how they are treated by the service people. Customers want to feel caring and sympathy from the service people, they want to be treated politely and honestly. Uncaring attitude and lack of action to solve the problem may lead to the feeling that their problems are not taken seriously by the company, therefore, customers may feel that they are treated unfairly. Wilson et al.(2008) pointed out that lack of training and empowerment can result employees' wrong behavior when dealing with complaint customers. "A frustrated front-line employee who has no authority to compensate the customer may easily respond in a aloof or uncaring manner, especially if the customer is angry and/or rude". They also argued that even though the outcome and procedural fairness is managed in a good way by the provider, the interactional fairness can dominate these other two types, if it is managed poorly.
3. Method 
3.1 Design 
Aiming to explore how the perceived justice affect customers' perceptions on service recovery, this study was based on interviews rather than questionnaires. I interviewed customers who had complained experiences as I felt that complaining customers would like to talk about their experiences and may provide interesting information. 
Considering that the complaint processes are complex, and full of different kinds of emotions which the respondents themselves may not realized clearly, a combination of interview guide approach and informal conversation interview approach was conducted. The informal conversational interview is the most open-ended approach to interviewing(Patton, 1990:281). It relies entirely on the spontaneous generation of questions in the natural flow of an interaction. This approach "maintains maximum flexibility to pursue information in whatever direction appears to be appropriate".   A general interview guide was designed before hand to keep the conversations go to the right direction. 
Patton(1990) described six types of questions that consist the content of the interview, these are experience questions, opinion questions, felling questions, knowledge questions, sensory questions, and background questions. Table 2. illustrates the interview questions based on different types of questions. 
[Table]
During the interviews, the respondent was positioned as the expert and the interviewer as the facilitator of the discovery process. Respondents were encouraged to talk about their experiences as much as possible, after that, the researcher tried to identify how did fairness factors work in these service recovery processes. 
3.2 Data collection 
Before the interview, the respondents were informed about the aim of the study, which was to understand rather than to judge, so that the respondents knew there was no right or wrong answers, and the data collection was anonymous. The conversation started with a professional, friendly atmosphere. Some irrelevant chatting before the interview was necessary to relax the respondents and build rapport, so that the respondent would feel free and comfortable to provide information. The concept "service recovery" was explained to all the respondents at the beginning of the interview to ensure all the respondents understand it correctly. 
The data was collected from eight interviewees who had complained experiences. Intensity sampling strategy was applied in choosing interviewees. This approach focuses on information-rich cases that manifest the phenomenon intensely, but not extremely(Patton, 1990). The interviewees were asked about his/her experience about service recovery. When respondents had experienced more than one failure in their experiences, they were asked to consider the most important one.
As an informal conversation interview approach was employed, the interviews were not tap-recorded. The interviewer made notes during the conversation and then organized the notes into short summary for each interview. In order to assess the trustworthiness of the data, Silverman(2006) and Wallendorf and Belk's(1989) eight criteria were used to assess this study. Table 3 shows the measurement.


[Table] 

4. Result
There are many similar patterns among the eight interviews. To begin with, there are only two people were happy after the service recovery, interviewee number 1 and interviewee number 3. These two happy interviewees share a similarity that they both  got something extra when they complained, except for the returned money or a new product. In other words, the outcome fairness has been achieved or surpassed . They both described how they were pleasantly surprised and thought that it was too much. Quoting interviewee number 1: “I was upset when we arrived at the second restaurant, I mean we are all over 70 and had to walk that distance! But they were so nice had set up such a nice table for us, so we were quite happy again when we sat down. And then they brought out the sparkling wine, and we were all so amazed!” Interviewee number 3 also described how pleasantly surprised she was when she did not only get a new taco sauce, but a lot of other products as well for free. 
Additionally, interviewees who were unsatisfied with the service recovery also said that they would not use that particular service again or recommend it to their friends. However, there is an exception, interviewee number 5. Although she was unhappy to wait for a very long time to get her furniture delivered, and had to connect the delivery firm herself, she says she will probably go to the same store again, because her prior experiences with the company were pleasant. She said in the interview: “... considering most of my shopping experiences (in the store) were pleasant, I guess sometimes problems just happen. I still use the service but I do not trust it like I did before”. 
This case reflects that customer's previous relationship with the service provider affects the way he/she reacts to the service recovery process. The impact of previous experiences can also be found in the experience of interviewee 7, who had to wait for a very long time for her food and then eventually was served cold food. The service people responded well to her complaint, and did only charge her party for the alcohol and not for the children's meals even though the children were content with their food and drinks. In other words, they basically experienced outcome fairness, procedural fairness and interactional fairness. Still, the person and her family were unhappy and she said they would never go back. When asked why, she responded “I have experienced bad service there before, and that was just the last drop!” Although all the three dimensions of fairness have been achieved in this case, the interviewee was unhappy and felt repeating similar mistakes in the same service provider is  intolerable.  
Interviewee number 4, who returned the broken mobile phone, basically got what he wanted – a new phone – but was still unhappy because the unfriendly attitude of the service people and those procedures he had to follow before he actually talked to the person who can made decision. In other words, there was outcome fairness, but not procedural fairness or interactional fairness. Interviewee number 6, who was served the bad fish, was in a similar way upset because he too had to fight with the personnel before getting their service recovery. Service people's willingness to help seems to be an important factor in achieving interactional fairness.
Almost all interviewees mentioned trust at some point during the interview. In most of the cases, the trust for the company was at least partly lost, for various periods of time. How much and for how long, depends on the kind of service and the degree of inconvenience the problem caused the customer, and how effective the service recovery was. Interviewee number 2, who bought the channel package that actually was not available in his area, said he most definitely would not use any of the company's services again because he thought they were so incompetent. To win back his trust, could prove hard to the company. The man said that he went to their shop again after he got his money back and his faulty package cancelled, just to let them know how annoyed he felt. Had the company then given him some kind of additional compensation for the inconvenience, the man might have felt that he got better outcome fairness and thereby felt better about the company all in all. Interviewee number 8, who got the stone in his plum, said that he had not bought the same plums again but that he was not sure if it was just because of the incident. In any case, it had not affected his trust for the whole company and all its products, i.e. he would still buy other products from them. 
It is evident, based on these empirical studies, that a customer's feeling of distrust and inconvenience after a problem has occurred can be reduced if the service recovery process is good enough. Interviewee number 3, who bought the taco sauce, was very upset at first because she was having people over for a taco dinner and suddenly she had no taco sauce to offer and that was a great inconvenience. After having received the package from the manufacturer, she was a happy customer again. Interviewee number 8 also bought a faulty product, and not only was it inconvenient for him he was also slightly injured. He did, however, only get a gift card for a new product, and was not happy because he did not feel that there was outcome fairness. Quoting: “And can you believe it, the new pack of stone less plums had stones in them as well! The second time around I didn't complain anymore. I was tired of the company and the plums...” In this case, the manufacturers would probably have stood a better chance to keep him as a plum-customer had they sent him something else as well.
5. Discussion 
Through the interviews, several factors affect the service recovery result have been identified. These factors are: quality of the recovery, surprise factor, friendliness of personnel and previous relationship with the company. Surprise factors, including extra discount and free gifts can be attributed to compensations which are important in helping restore customers' perceptions of outcome fairness. Quality of service recovery is related to the procedural fairness perceptions. The speed by which service failures are corrected or complaints are handled is one of the major determinants of customers' perceptions of procedural fairness (Blodgett et al., 1997; Tax et al., 1998). Friendliness of the personnel, which can be reflected through apology and service attitude, is linked to the interactional fairness. Previous relationship with the company, also affect the result of service recovery to some extent.the following are some main  findings:
First, the outcome fairness plays a critical role in customers' perceptions to service recovery, but not a determinant one. Our interviews imply that solving problems and compensations like free gifts and discounts do not necessarily lead to customers’ satisfaction even though apologies and explanations were made immediately by the service provider. However, I noticed that among all the interviewees, two interviewees who were satisfied with the recovery received free gifts as compensations and the four interviewees who did not received gifts or discounts were all dissatisfied.
Secondly, compensations can help to make up for the failure of unconvinced complain channels or no apology, however, when complaints can not be solved quickly together with no apology or no explanation, the compensation was useless. The interviews imply that when the procedural fairness can not be achieved, customers felt that only an apology was not good enough, they felt they deserve to get extra compensations for the unfair treatments. It seems that if there are no compensations, service providers should make sure that they can achieve both procedural fairness and interactional fairness so that it is possible to achieve customer satisfaction.
Additionally, except for the three fairness dimensions, customers' previous experiences with the service providers can affect the results of the service recovery. If the customers' experiences with the service providers were pleasant, they are more likely to give them a second chance. However, if the service providers had made mistakes before, customers tend to switch provider and avoid using the same service provider in the future. There are two interviewees who received compensations and apologies and did not meet any trouble when complained, but they still not satisfied with the results. Both of them had unpleasant experiences with the service providers. Although all the three fairness dimensions had been achieved, they choose to switch provider. 
Finally, although service failures do happen, if well handled, a successful recovery can strengthen the relationship between complained customers and the service provider. The interview also shows that service recovery can be used as a chance for marketing communications. By sending gifts or new products as compensations, companies can introduce new products to customers, they can use the recovery as a chance to get the customer interested in and aware of more of their products. The experience of interviewee number 3 is a good example. The package of products they sent her as compensation only cost little for the company, and it made her happy and aware of other products.“It actually resulted in me buying more of their products! Some of the other products that they sent me in the package I would probably not have thought of buying before, but after having tried them I have bought them several times.”On the country, a poor recovery or a recovery neither too good nor too bad can weaken the relationship. Meanwhile, it is not only the result of the recovery but also customers’ experiences with the service provider before influence their decisions about whether to stay or switch. 
6. Managerial implications and limitations
The findings of this study suggest that when dealing with unsatisfied customers, service providers should pay attention to the three dimensions of fairness. Service providers should ensure that their service recovery processes are well handled.  Apology should be made immediately and it should be easy for unsatisfied customers to complain. When the recovery processes are well handled, compensations are not necessary. However, when there is delay or inconvenience or lack of apology in the process, compensations can be used to restore customers' perceptions of outcome fairness. 
For companies, to apologize and satisfy customers' needs immediately is perhaps the most cost effective way to keep customers. When problems can be solved quickly and with good service attitude, companies do not need to pay extra to restore customers' perceptions of outcome fairness. This suggests that service providers should teach the front-line employees how to react to customer complain immediately, and front-line employees should be authorized to handle the complaints with some flexibility, like to offer some compensation. 
Besides, service providers should find ways to avoid commit similar mistakes. For any service providers, service failures are inevitable, but if customers experience the same mistake again and again, finally, they would choose another service provider rather than complain. To make things even worse, these disappointed customers are very likely to spread bad words to influence other customers and the potential customers. If the service failure were serious, unsatisfied customers may turn to sue the service provider through legal procedures.
There are some limitations about this study. First, this study is based on eight interviews, and most of these interviewees' experiences were related to retailing and restaurant services. There are only a limited number of interviews, to better reflect how the three fairness dimensions affect the service recovery results and customers' relationships with the providers and generalize the findings, a large number of interviews are necessary.
Besides, theses interviews cannot reflect situations in fields which customers do not have much choice, like insurance and bank services and transportation services. Further study could do a wider field study to explore the service recovery situations in different service fields. 
Additionally, in the interviews, I noticed that there are other factors, like the previous experiences with the service providers, the perceptions about the brand and expectations about the service recovery can also affect the results. 



