Motivating  employees

Abastract
All motivated employees perform better when their leaders understand how to support them. Many studies have been conducted to understand human behaviour and there are no consensus about which theory is the best. Scientific management was very popular in the early years of XX century, however today  people appreciate more the Content and Process theories. This paper sets to explain those theories in a workplace and discuss their advantages and disadvantages. By understanding the advantanges of each theory we can construct a framework for motivating people and answer the question of what leaders can actually do.

Introduction
Motivation is a fascinating topic to social scientists; however it has a very practical use for managers. By understanding what motivates people, managers are able to incentive them to be more satisfied with their work and to perform better. The question of what and how to motivate employees within an organization has been a subject for many years, that started with the early work of Frederick Taylor (1911), the originator of scientific management, however there still are no definitive answers. The concept of scientific management, which is not a theory of work motivation, but, a technique to make labor more efficient is very important to managers due to its assumptions that include motivational implications. The most important implication obtained states that payment is the main driver for employees. This concept does not take into consideration people who do well in their jobs but receive low economic rewards and the next findings took a different view. 
This was the Hawthorne Studies, a new school of management thinking, which raise the importance of people뭩 social needs as well as economics payments. It includes 2 different groups. There are Content theories, which focuses on the factors that initiate and direct certain behaviors; and Process theories, which describes the psychological process that takes place in the workplace. 
Despite the importance of these theories, there are still many limitations to it. The content theories of motivation include Maslow큦 needs theory, Aderfer큦 theory, Herzberg큦 Two-factor Theory and McClelland큦 Theory of Learned needs. These theories explain human behaviour in different perspectives and the simple answer to which one is more accurate is impossible. None should be considered as being superior to others on defining human needs and they should complement each other. For example Maslow does not take into consideration individual differences and the effect of changing needs. 
 One of the most visible limitations of the content theories adresses the lack of a process to motivate, or how a particular individual come to be motivated. To answer this limitation process theories were created. These theories sets the direction, intensity and persistence of workers while recognizing that most people have preferences for specific outcomes rather than others.
This paper intends to show that there is no perfect approach concerning motivating employees, however it underlies some theories that can be useful in the role of a leader, helping them make better decisions.
The beginning of this study starts by defining motivation in a work context and the process of motivation. It continues by presenting different theories of work motivation and ends up linking the theories to better understand and influence employee뭩 behaviors.

Method/Materials
I will explain each theory individually by pointing key features and characteristics. 
Results (Analysis) 
I will discuss advantages and disadvantages of each theory individually.
Discussion

Conclusions
I will try to summarize my main findings and explain how each theory can compliment each other. In the end I will give some practical advises for leaders to use when they need it.

